HARVARD UNIVERSITY

UBRARY OF THE

GRADUATE SCHOOL
OF EDUCATION

A BALANCED COLOR SPHERE

PASTEL SKETCH

\ i .\! WTH* COLOR SPHERE

A COLOR NOTATION

By
H. MUNSELL

A MEASURED COLOR
SYSTEM, BASED ON THE
THREE QUALITIES
Hue, ValuCy and Chroma

WITH

Illustrative Models, Charts,
AND A Course of Study
Arranged for Teachers

Geo. H. Ellis Co.

BOSTON

HjWVARD UNtVWSrTY

fil^OXlATE SCHOOL OF LDUCATIOH

HQt^QE C GUTMAN LIftRARY

OCT. 3, IMt

Copyright, 1905

BY
A. H. MUNSBLL

Ail rights rt served

Entkrbd at Stationbrs* Hall

AUTHOR'S PREFACE.

At various times during the past ten years, the gist of these pages
has been given in the form of lectures to students of the Normal
Art School, the Art Teachers* Association, and the Twentieth
Century Club. In October of last year it was presented before
the Society of Arts of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
at the suggestion of Professor Charles R. Cross.

Grateful acknowledgment is due to many whose helpful criti-
cism has aided in its development, notably Mr. Benjamin Ives
Gilman, Secretary of the Museum of Fine Arts, Professor Harry E.
Clifford, of the Institute of Technology, and Mr. Myron T. Prit-
chard, master of the Everett School, Boston.

A. H. M.

Chbstnttt Hill, Mass, 1906.

INTRODUCTION.

The lack of definiteness which is at present so general in color
nomenclatiire» is due in large measure to the failure to appreciate
the fundamental characteristics on which color differences depend.
For the physicist, the expression of the wave length of any partic-
ular light is in most cases sufficient, but in the great majority of
instances where colors are referred to, something more than this
and something easier of realization is essential.

The attempt to express color relations by using merely two
dimensions, or two definite characteristics, can never lead to a
successful system. For this reason alone the system proposed
by Mr. Munsell, with its three dimensions of hue, value, and
chroma, is a decided step in advance over any previous propo-
sition. By means of these three dimensions it is possible to com-
pletely express any particular color, and to differentiate it from
colors ordinarily classed as of the same general character.

The expression of the essential characteristics of a color is, how-
ever, not all that is necessary. There must be some accurate
and not too complicated system for dupUcating these characteris-
tics, one which shall not alter with time or place, and which shall
be susceptible of easy and accurate redetermination. From the
teaching standpoint also a logical and sequential development is
absolutely essential. This Mr. Munsell seems to have most suc-
cessfully accomplished.

INTRODUCTION

In the detennination of his relationships he has made use of
distinctly scientific methods, and there seems no reason why his
suggestions should not lead to an exact and definite system
of color essentials. The Munsell photometer, which is briefly
referred to, is an instrument of wide range, high precision, and
great sensitiveness, and permits the valuations which are necessary
in his system to be accurately made. We all appreciate the neces-
sity for some improvement in our ideas of color, and the natural
inference is that the training should be begun in early youth.
The present system in its modified form possesses elements of
simplicity and attractiveness which should appeal to children, and
give them almost unconsciously a power of discrimination which
would prove of immense value in later life. The possibiUties in
this system are very great, and it has been a privilege to be
allowed during the past few years to keep in touch with its
development. I cannot but feel that we have here not only a
rational color nomenclature, but also a system of scientific impor-
tance and of practical value.

H. E. Clifford.
Massachttsetts Institute of Teghnologt,
February, 1905

CONTENTS.

Chaftbb Paraoraph

I. COLOB NAMES : bed, yellow, green, blue, fubplb, 1

n. COLOR QUALITIES : hue, value, chboma .... 20

in. COLOB MIXTUBE : A tbi-dimensional balance . . 54

IV. PBISMATIC COLOBS 87

V. THE PIGMENT COLOB SPHEBE 102

VI. COLOB NOTATION : A written colob system . . 132

Vn. COLOB HABMONY : A measubed belation .... 146

APPENDIX.

GLOSSABY OF COLOB TEBMS.

A COLOB SYSTEM AND COUBSE OF STUDY BASED

ON THE COLOB SOLID AND ITS CHABTS.

INDEX.

Chafteb I.
COLOR NAMES.

Writing from Samoa to Sidney Colvin in London, Stevenson*
says: '* Perhaps in the same way it might amuse you to send us
any pattern of wall paper that might strike you as cheap, pretty,
and suitable for a room in a hot and extremely bright climate.
It should be borne in mind that our climate can be extremely
dark, too. Our sitting-room is to be in varnished wood. The
room I have particularly in mind is a sort of bed and sitting room,
pretty large, lit on three sides, and the colour in favour of its pro-
prietor at present is a topazy yellow. But then with what colour
to relieve it? For a little work-room of my own at the back I
should rather like to see some patterns of unglossy — ^well, I'll be
hanged if I can describe this red. It's not Turkish, and it's not
Roman, and it's not Indian; but it seems to partake of the last
two, and yet it can't be either of them, because it ought to be able
to go with vermilion. Ah, what a tangled web we weave! Any-
way, with what brains you have left choose me and send me some
— ^many — patterns of the exact shade."

(1) Where could be found a more delightful cry for some rational
way to describe color? He wants "a topazy yellow" and a red
that is not Turkish nor Roman nor Indian, but that *' seems to
partake of the last two, and yet it can't be either of them." As

*Vailima Letters. Oct. 8, 1902.

8 NAMES

a cap to the climax comes his demand for '' patterns of the exact
shade." Thus one of the clearest and most forceful writers of
English finds himself unable to describe the color he wants. And
why? Simply because popular language does not clearly state
a single one of the three qualities united in every color, and which
must be known before one may even hope to convey his color
conceptions to another.

(S) The incongruous and bizarre nature of our present color
names must appear to any thoughtful person. Baby blue, pea-
cock blue, Nile green, apple green, lemon yellow, straw yellow,
rose pink, heliotrope, royal purple. Magenta, Solferino, plum, and
automobile are popular terms, conveying di£Ferent ideas to dif-
ferent persons and utterly failing to define colors. The terms
used for a single hue, such as pea green, sea green, olive green,
grass green, sage green, evergreen, invisible green, are not to be
trusted in ordering a piece of doth. They invite mistakes and
disappointment. Not only are they inaccurate: they are inappro-
priate. Can we imagine musical tones called lark, canary, cock-
atoo, crow, cat, dog, or mouse, because they bear some distant
resemblance to the cries of those animals ?
Color needs a system.

(3) Music is equipped with a system by which it defines each
sound in terms of its pitch, intensity, and duration, without drag-
ging in loose allusions to the endlessly varying sounds of nature.
So should color be supplied with an appropriate system, based
on the hue, value, and chroma of our sensations, and not attempt-
ing to describe them by the indefinite and varying colors of nat-
ural objects. The system now to be considered portrays the
three dimensions of color, and measures each by an ap-
propriate scale. It does not rest upon the whim of an individual.

NAMES 9

but upon physical measurements made possible by special color
apparatus. The results may be tested by any one who comes to
the problem with ^'a clear mind» a good eye, and a fair supply of
patience."

Clear mental images make clear speech. Vague thonghta find trague
utterance.

(4) The child gathers flowers, hoards colored beads, chases
butterflies, and begs for the gaudiest painted toys. At first his
strong color sensations are suflGiciently described by the simple
terms of red, yellow, green, blue, and purple. But he soon sees
that some are light, while others are dark, and later comes to per-
ceive that each hue has many grayer degrees. Now, if he wants
to describe a particular red, — such as that of his faded cap, — ^he
is not content to merely call it red, since he is aware of other red
objects which are very unlike it. So he gropes for means to define
this particular red; and, having no standard of comparison, — ^no
scale by which to estimate, — ^he hesitatingly says that it is a *' sort
of duU red."

(5) Thus early is he cramped by the poverty of color language.
He has never been given an appropriate word for this color qual-
ity, and has to borrow one signifying the opposite of sharp, which
belongs to edge tools rather than to colors.

Most color terms are borrowed from other senses.

(6) When his older sister refers to the ** tone " of her green dress,
or speaks of the "key of color** in a picture, he is naturally con-
fused, because tone and key are terms associated in his mind with
music. It may not be long before he will hear that "a color
note has been pitched too high," or that a certain artist "paints in
a minor key." All these terms lead to mixed and indefinite ideas,
and leave him unequipped for the clear expression of color qualities.

10 NAMES

(7) Musical art is not so handicapped. It has an established
scale with measured intervals and definite terms. Likewise,
coloristic art must establish a scale, measure its intervals, and
name its qualities in unmistakable fashion.

Color has three dimensions.

(8) It may sound strange to say that color has three dimensions,
but it is easily proved by the fact that each of them can be meas-
ured. Thus in the case of the boy's faded cap its redness or
HUE is determined by one instrument; the amount of light in
the red, which is its value, is found by another instrument; while
still a third instrument determines the purity or chboma of the red.

The omission of any one of these three qualities leaves us in
doubt as to the character of a color, just as truly as the character
of this studio would remain imdefined if the length were omitted
and we described it as 2S feet wide by 14 feet high. The imagi-
nation would be free to ascribe any length it chose, from S5 to 100
feet. This length might be differently conceived by every indi-
vidual who tried to supply the missing factor.

(9) To illustrate the tri-dimensional nature of colors. Suppose
we peel an orange and divide it in five parts, leaving the sections

slightly connected below (Fig. 4). Then
let us say that all the reds we have ever
seen are gathered in one of the sections,
all yellows in another, all greens in the third,
blues in the fourth, and purples in the fifth.
^*i4^, Next we will assort the hues in each sec-
tion so that the lightest are near the top,
and grade regularly to the darkest near the bottom. A white
wafer connects all the sections at the top, and a black wafer may
be added beneath.

NAMES 11

(10) The fruit is then filled with assorted colors, graded from
white to black, according to their values, and disposed by their
HUES in the five sections. A slice near the top will uncover Ught
values in all hues, and a slice near the bottom will fiuad dark
values in the same hues. A sUce across the middle discloses a
circuit of hues all of middle value; that is, midway between
the extremes of white and black.

(11) Two color dimensions are thus shown in the orange, and
it remains to exhibit the third, which is called chroma, or strength
of color. To do this, we have only to take each section in turn,
and, without disturbing the values abeady assorted, shove the gray-
est in toward the narrow edge, and grade outward to the purest
on the surface. Each sUce across the fruit still shows the circuit
of hues in one uniform value; but the strong chromas are at the
outside, while grayer and grayer chromas make a gradation in-
ward to neutral gray at the centre, where all trace of color disap-
pears. The thin edges of all sections unite in a scale of gray from
black to white, no matter what hue each contains.

The curved outside of each section shows its particular hue
graded from black to white; and, should the section be cut at right
angles to the thin edge, it would show the third dimension, —
chroma, — ^f or the color is graded evenly from the surface to neutral
gray. A pin stuck in at any point traces the third dimension.

A color sphere can be need to unite the three
dimensions of hue, yalue, and chroma.
(12) Having used the familiar structure of
the orange as a help in classifying colors, let
us substitute a geometric solid, like a sphere,'*'
and make use of geographical terms. The
north pole is white. The south pole is black.

*See frontispiece.

12 NAMES

The equator is a circuit of middle reds, yellows, greens, blues,
and purples. Parallels above the equator locate this circuit in
lighter values, and parallels below trace it in darker values.
The vertical axis joining black and white is a neutral scale of
gray values, while perpendiculars to it (like a pin thrust into the
orange) are scales of chroma. Thus our color notions may be
brought into an orderly relation by the color sphere. Any color
describes its light and strength by its location in the solid or on
the surface, and is named by its place in the combined scales of
hue, value, and chroma.
Two dimensions fail to describe a color.

(13) Much of the popular misunderstanding of color is caused
by ignorance of these three dimensions or by an attempt to make
two dimensions do the work of three.

(14) Flat diagrams showing hues and values, but omitting to
define chromas, are as incomplete as would be a map of Switzer-
land with the mountains left out, or a harbor chart without indi-
cations of the depth of water. We find by aid of the measuring
instruments that pigments are very unequal in this third dimen-
sion,— chroma, — ^producing mountains and valleys on the color
sphere, so that, when the color system is worked out in pigm^its
and charted, some colors must be traced well out beyond the
spherical surface (paragraphs 125-127). Indeed, a coloe tree
is needed to display by the imequal levels and lengths of its branches
the individuality of pigment colors. But, whatever solid or figure is
used to illustrate color relations, it must combine the three scales of
hue, value, and chroma, and these definite scales furnish a name
for every color based upon its intrinsic qualities, and free from
terms purloined in other sensations, or caught from the fluctuating
colors of natural objects.

NAMES 13

How this system describes the spectmm.

(15) The solar spectrum and rainbow are the most stimulating
color experiences with which we are acquainted. Can they be
described by this solid system?

(16) The lightest part of the spectrum is a narrow field of green-
ish yellow, grading into darker red on one side and into darker
green upon the other, followed by still darker blue and purple.
Upon the sphere these values of the spectral colors trace a path
high up on the yellow section, near white, and slanting down-
ward across the red and green sections, which are traversed near
the level of the equator, it goes on to cross the blue and purple
well down toward black.

(17) This forms an inclined circuit, crossing the equator at
opposite points, and suggests the ecliptic or the rings of Saturn
(see outside cover). A pale rainbow would describe a slanting
circuit nearer white, and a dimmer one would fall within the sphere,
while an intensely brilliant spectrum projects far beyond the sur-
face of the sphere, so greatly is the diroma of its hues in excess
of the common pigments with which we work out our problems.

(18) At the outset it is well to recognize the place of the spectrum
in this system, not only because it is the established basis of sci-
entific study, but especially because the invariable order assumed
by its hues is the only stable hint which Nature affords us in
her infinite color play.

(19) All our color sensations are included in the color solid.
None are left out by its scales of hue, value, and chroma. Indeed,
the imagination is led to conceive and locate still purer colors
than any we now possess. Such increased degrees of color sen-
sation can be named, and clearly conveyed by symbols to another
person as soon as the system is comprehended.

Chapter II.
COLOR QUALITIES.

(20) The three color qualities are hue, value, and chroma.
HUB is the name of a color.

(£1) Hue is the quality by which we distinguish one color from
another, as a red from a yellow, a green, a blue, or a purple.
This names the hue, but does not tell whether it is light or dark,
weak or strong, — Cleaving us in doubt as to its value and its chroma.

Science attributes this quality to difference in the length of ether
waves impinging on the retina, which cause the sensation of color.
The wave length M. 5269 gives a sensation of green, while M. 6867
gives a sensation of red.*
VALUE is the light of a color.

(£2) Value is the quality by which we distinguish a light color
from a dark one. Color values are loosely called tints and shades,
but the terms are frequently misapplied. A tint should be a light
value, and a shade should be darker; but the word "shade*' has
become a general term for any sort of color, so that a shade of
yellow may prove to be lighter than a tint of blue. A photometric
scale of value places all colors in relation to the extremes
of white and black, but cannot describe their hue or their
chroma.

^See Qlossary for definitionB of Micron, Photometer, Retina, and Red, also for Hue,
Tint, Shade, Value, Color Variables, Luminosity, and Chroma.

QUALITIES 15

Science describes this quality as due to difference in the height
or amplitude of ether waves impinging on the retina. Small am-
plitudes of the wave lengths given in paragraph SI produce the
sensation of dark green and dark red: larger amplitudes give the
sensation of lighter green and lighter red.*
CHROMA is the strength of a color.

(23) Chroma is the quality by which we distinguish a strong
color from a weak one. To say that a rug is strong in color gives
no hint of its hues or values, only its chromas. Loss of chroma
is loosely called fading, but this word is frequently used to include
changes of value and hue. Take two autumn leaves, identical
in color, and expose one to the weather, while the other is waxed
and pressed in a book. Soon the exposed leaf fades into a neutral
gray, while the protected one preserves its strong chroma almost
intact. If, in fading, the leaf does not change its hue or its value,
there is only a loss of chroma, but the fading process is more likely
to induce some change of the other two qualities. Fading, how-
ever, cannot define these changes.

Science describes chroma as the purity of one wave length sep-
arated from all others. Other wave lengths, intermingUng,
make its chroma less pure. A beam of daylight can combine all
wave lengths in such balance as to give the sensation of white-
ness, because no single wave is in excess.*

(24) The color sphere (see Fig. 1) is a convenient model to
illustrate these three qualities, — ^hue, value, and chroma, — and
unite them by measured scales.

(25) The north pole of the color sphere is white, and the south
pole black. Value or luminosity of colors ranges between these
two extremes. This is the vertical scale, to be memorized as F,

*See definition of White in Glossary.

16 QUALITIES

the initial for both value and vertical. Vertical movement
through color may thus be thought of as a change of value, but
not as a change of hue or of chroma. Hues
of color are spread around the equator of
the sphere. This is a horizontal scale,
memorized as Hy the initial for both hue and
horizontal. Horizontal movement around the
color soUd is thus thought of as a change
of hue, but not of value or of chroma. A line
inward from the strong surface hues to the
neutral gray axis, traces the graying of each color, which is
loss of chroma, and conversely a line beginning with neutral
gray at the vertical axis, and becoming more and more colored
until it passes outside the sphere, is a scale of chroma, which
is memorized as C, the initial both for chroma and centre.
Thus the sphere lends its three dimensions to color description,
and a color applied anywhere to its surface or within it, is located
and named by its degree of hue, of value, and of chroma.
HUES first appeal to the child, VALUES next, and CHROllAS last.

(£6) Color education begins with ability to recognize and name
certain hues, such as red, yellow, green, blue, and purple (see
paragraphs 182 and 183). Nature presents these hues in union
with such varieties of value and chroma that, unless there is some
standard of comparison, it is impossible for one person to describe
them intelligently to another.

(27) The solar spectrum forms a basis for scientific color anal-
ysis, taught in technical schools; but it is quite beyond the com-
prehension of a child. He needs something more tangible and
constantly in view to train his color notions. He needs to handle
colors, place them side by side for comparison, imitate them with

QUALITIES 17

crayons, paints, and colored stuffs, so as to test the growth of per-
ception, and learn by simple yet accurate terms to describe each
by its hue, its value, and its chroma.

(^8) Pigments, rather than the solar spectrum, are the practical
agents of color work. Certain of them, selected and measured
by this system (see Chapter V.), will be known as baddle colors*
because they stand midway in the scales of value and chroma.
These middle colors are preserved in imperishable enamels,*
so that the child can handle and fix them in his memory. These
afford a permanent basis for comparing all other degrees of color.
He learns to grade each fundamental color to the extremes of
value and chroma.

(29) Experiments with crayons and paints, and efforts to match
middle colors, train his color sense to finer perceptions. Having
learned to name colors, he compares them with the enamels of
middle value, and can describe how light or dark they are. Later
he perceives their differences of strength, and, comparing them
with the enamels of middle chroma, can describe how weak or
strong they are. Thus the full significance of these middle colors
as a practical basis for all color estimates becomes apparent; and,
when at a more advanced stage he studies the best examples of
decorative color, he will again encounter them in the most beauti-
ful products of Oriental art.

Is it possible to define the endless varieties of color ?

(30) At first glance it would seem almost hopeless to attempt
the naming of every kind and degree of color. But, if all these
varieties possess the same three qualities, only in different degrees,
and if each quality can be measured by a scale, then there is a
clue to this labyrinth.

*See Enamel in Glossary.

QUALITIES

A COLOR SPH£RS and COLOR TRS£ to unite hue, yalne, and chroma.

(31) This clue is found in the union of these three qualities
by measured scales in a color sphere and color tree,* The equator

of the sphere t naiay be divided into ten parts,
and serve as the scale of hue, marked R,
YR, Y, GY, G, BG, B, PB, P, and RP.
Its vertical axis may be divided into ten parts
to serve as the scale of value, numbered from
black (0) to white (10). Any perpendicular
to the neutral axis is a scale of chroma. On
the plane of the equator this scale is num-
bered 1, £, 3, 4, 5, from the centre to the surface.

(32) This chroma scale may be raised or lowered to any level
of value, always remaining perpendicular to the axis, and serv-
ing to measure the chroma of every hue at
every level of value. The fact that some
colors exceed others to such an extent as to
carry them out beyond the sphere is proved
by measuring instruments, but the fact is a
new one to many persons. (Figs. 3 and 2.)

(33) For this reason the color tree is a
completer model than the sphere, although
the simplicity of the latter makes it best for a child's comprehension.

*See Color Tree in paragraph 14.

t Unaware that the spherical arrangement had been used years before, I devised a
double tetrahedron to classify colors, while a student of painting in 1879. It now appears
that the sphere was common property with psychologists, having been described by Riinge
in 1810. Earlier still, Lambert had suggested a pyramidal form. Both are based on the
erroneous assumption that red, yellow, and blue are primary sensations, and also fail to
place these hues in a iust scale of luminosity. My twirling psrramid and its completer
development in the present model have always made prominent the artistic feeling for
color value. It differs in this and in other ways from previous systems, and is fortiinate
in possessing new apparatus to measure the degrees of hue, value, and chroma.

QUALITIES 19

(34) The color tree is made by taking the vertical axis of the
sphere, which carries a scale of value, for the trunk. The branches
are at right angles to the trunk; and, as in the sphere, they carry
the scale of chroma. Colored balls on the branches tell their
Hue. In order to show the strongest chroma of each color, its
branch is attached to the trunk (or neutral axis) at a level de-
manded by its value, — ^the yellow nearest TC^hite at the top, then
the green, red, blue, and purple branches, approaching black in
the order of their lower values. It will be remembered that the
chroma of the sphere ceased with 5 at the equator. The color
tree prolongs this through 6, 7, 8, and 9. The branch ends carry-
ing colored balls, represent the most powerful red, yellow, green,
blue, and purple pigments which we now possess, and could be
lengthened, should stronger chromas be discovered.

(35) Such models set up a permanent image of color relations.
Every point is self-described by its place in the united scales of
hue, value, and chroma. These scales fix each new perception
of color in the child*s mind by its situation in the color solid. The
importance of such a definite image can hardly be overestimated,
for without it one color sensation tends to efface another. When
the child looks at a color, and has no basis of comparison, he soon
has a vague memory that cannot be described. These models,
on the contrary, lead to an inteUigent estimate of each color in
terms of its hue, its value, and its chroma; while the permanent
enamels correct any personal bias by a definite standard.

(36) Thus defined, a color falls into a logical relation with all
other colors in the system, and is easily memorized, so that its
image may be recalled at any distance of time or place by the no-
tation.

(37) These solid models help to assemble colors and memorize

«0 QUALITIES

them, and the memory is further strengthened by a simple nota-
tion, which records each color so that it cannot be mistaken for
any other. By these written scales a child gains an in-
stinctive estimate of relations, so that, when he is delighted
with a new color combination, its proportions are noted and
understood.

(38) Musical art has long enjoyed the advantages of a definite
scale and notation. Should not the art of coloring gain by
similar definition? The musical scale is not left to per-
sonal whim, nor does it change from day to day; and something
as clear and stable would be an advantage in training the color
sense.

(S9) Perception of color is crude at first. The child sees only
the most obvious distinctions, and prefers the strongest stimu-
lation. But perception becomes refined by exercise, and, when
a child tries to imitate the subtle colors of nature with paints, he
begins to realize that the strongest colors are not the most beauti-
ful,— ^rather the tempered ones, which may be compared to the
tempered scales in music. To describe these tempered colors,
he must estimate their hue, value, and chroma, and be able to de-
scribe in what degree his copy departs from the natural color.
And, with this gain in perception and imitation of the color in
nature, he finds a strong desire to invent combinations to please
his fancy. Thus the study divides into three related attitudes,
which may be called recognition, imitation, and invention. Rec-
ognition of color is fundamental, but it would be tedious to spend
a year or two in formal and dry exercises to train recognition of color
alone ; for each step in recognition of color is best tested by exercise in
its imitation and arrangement. When perception becomes keener,
emphasis can be placed on imitation of the colors found in art and in

QUALITIES 21

nature, resting finally on the selection and grouping of colors for
design.*

Every color can be recognized, named, matched, imitated, and written
by its HUE, VALUE, and CHROMA.

(40) The notation used in this system places Hue (expressed
by an initial) at the left; Value (expressed by a number) at
the right and above a line; and Chroma (also expressed by
a number) at the right, below the line. Thus R f means

HUB (red), 7-^, and will be found to represent the qua-

^ ' CHROMA (9) ^ ^

Eties of the pigment vermilicm.

Hue, value, and chroma unite in every color sensation, but the
child cannot grasp them all at once. Hue-difference appeals to
him first, and he gains a permanent idea of five principal hues
from the enamels of bhddle colors, learning to name, match,
imitate, and finally write them by their initials: R (red), Y
(yellow), G (green), B (blue), and P (purple). Intermediates
formed by uniting successive pairs are also written by the
joined initials, YR (yeUow-red), GY (green-yellow), BG (blue-
green), PB (purple-blue), and RP (red-purple).

(41) Ten differences of hue are as many as a child can render
at the outset, yet in matching and imitating them he becomes
aware of their hght and dark quality, and learns to separate it
from hue as value-difference. Middle colors, as implied by that
name, stand midway between white and black, — ^that is, on the
equator of the sphere, — so that a middle red will be written R^,
suggesting the steps 6, 7, 8, and 9 which are above the equator,
while steps 4, 3, 2, and 1 are below. It is well to show only three
values of a color at first; for instance, the middle value contrasted

*See Course of Study, p. 86.

22 QUALITIES

with a light and a dark one. These are written R-^, R^, R^.
Soon he perceives and can imitate finer differences, and the red
scale may be written entire, as R^, R^, R^, R^, RA, R^, R^, R^,
R^, with black as 0 and white as 10.

(42) Chroma-difference is the third and most subtle color qual-
ity. The child is already unconsciously familiar with the middle
chroma of red, having had the enamels of middle color always
in view, and the red enamel is to be contrasted with the strongest
and weakest red chromas obtainable. These he writes Ry, R3-,
R7, seeing that this describes the chromas of red, but leaves out
its values. Rf , Rf , Rf , is the complete statement, showing that,
while both hue and value are unchanged, the chroma
passes from grayish red to middle red (enamel first learned)
and out to the strongest red in the chroma scale obtained by
vermilion.

(43) It may be long before he can imitate the intervening steps
of chroma, many children finding it difficult to express more
than five steps of the chroma scale, although easily making ten
steps of value and from twenty to thirty-five steps of hue. This
interesting feature is of psychologic value, and has been followed
in the color tree and color sphere.

Does such a scientific scheme leave any outlet for feeling and personal
expression of beauty?

(44) Lest this exact attitude in color study should seem inar-
tistic, compared with the free and almost chaotic methods in use,
let it be said that the stage thus far outlined is frankly disciplinaiy.
It is somewhat dry and unattractive, just as the early musical
training is fatiguing without inventive exercises. The child should
be encouraged at each step to exercise his fancy.

(45) Instead of cramping his outlook upon nature, it widens

QUALITIES 23

his grasp of color, and stores the memoiy with finer differences,
supplying more material by which to express his sense of color-
istic beauty.

(46) Color harmony, as now treated, is a purely personal affair,
difficult to refer to any clear principles or definite laws. The very
terms by which it seeks expression are borrowed from music, and
suggest vague analogies that fail when put to the test. Color
needs a new set of expressive terms, appropriate to its qualities,
before we can make an analysis as to the harmony or discord of
our color sensations.

(47) This need is supplied in the present system by measured
CHARTS, and a notation. Their very construction preserves the
balance of colors, as will be shown in the next chapter, while the
chapter on harmony (Chapter VII.) shows how harmonious pairs
and triads of color may be found by masks with measured intervals.
In fact, practice in the use of the charts supplies the imagination
with scales and sequences of color quite as definite and quite as
easily written as those sound intervals by which the musician con-
veys to others his sense of harmony. And, although in neither
art can training alone make the artist, yet a technical grasp of
these formal scales gives acquaintance with the full range of the
instrument, and is indispensable to artistic expression. From
these color scales each individual is free to choose combinations
in accord with his feeling for color harmony.

Let us make an outline of the course of color study traced in
the preceding pages.*

*See Appendix, A Color System and Course of Study, p. 85.

«4 QUALITIES

PERCEPTION of color.

(48) Hue-difference.

Middle hues (5 principals).
Middle hues (5 intermediates).

Middle hues (10 placed in sequence as scale of hue).
Valve-difference.
Light, middle, and dark values (without change of hue).
Light, middle, and dark values (traced with 5 principal

hues).
10 values traced with each hue. scale of value. The

Cdor Sphere.
Chromadifference.
Strong, middle, and weak chroma (without change of

hue).
Strong, middle, and weak chroma (traced with three

values without change of hue).
Strong, middle, and weak chroma (traced with three

values and ten hues).
Maxima of color and their gradation to white, black,

and gray. The Color Tree.
EXPRESSION of color.

(49) Matching and imitation of hues (using stuffs, crayons, and

paints).
Matching and imitation of values and hues (using stuffs,

crayons, and paints).
Matching and imitation of chromas, values, and hues (using

stuffs, crayons, and paints).

Value V Initial for hue.

Notation of cdor. Hue , H-r> numeral above

Chroma C f^^ ^^i^^^ ^^u^.

eral below for chroma.

QUALITIES 25

Sequences of color.

Two scales united, as hue and value, or chroma and value.
Three scales united, — each step a change of hue, value
and chroma.
Balance of color.

Opposites of equal value and chroma (R|^ and BG|^).
Opposites of equal value and unequal chroma (Rf and

BGf).
Opposites unequal both in value and chroma (R^ and

BGf).
Abea as an element of balance.
HARMONY of color.

(50) Selection of colors that give pleasure.

Study of butterfly wings and flowers, recorded by the

NOTATION.

Study of painted ornament, rugs, and mosaics, recorded

by the notation.
Personal choice of color pairs, balanced by H, V, C,

and area.
Personal choice of color triads, balanced by H, V, C,

and area.
Qrouping of colors to suit some practical use: wall papers,

rugs, book covers, etc.
Their analysis by the written notation.
Search for principles of harmony, expressed in measured

terms. ^

A definite plan of color stndy, with freedom as to details of presentation.*

(51) Having memorized these broad divisions of the study, a
clever teacher will introduce many a detail, to meet the mood of

*See Color Study aaaigned to each grade, in the Appendix.

26 QUALITIES

the class, or correlate this subject with other studies, without for
a moment losing the thread of thought or befogging the presenta-
tion. But to range at random in the immense field of color sensa-
tions, without plan or definite aim in view, only courts fatigue of
the retina and a chaotic state of mind.

(52) The same broad principles which govern the presentation
of other ideas apply with equal force in this study. A little, well
apprehended, is better than a mass of undigested facts. If the
child is led to discover, or at least to think he is discovering, new
things about color, the mind will be kept alert and seek out novel
illustrations at every step. Now and then a pupil will be found
who leads both teacher and class by intuitive appreciation of color,
and it is a subtle question how far such a nature can be helped
or hurt by formal exercises. • But such an exception is rare, and
goes to prove that systematic discipline of the color sense is neces-
sary for most children.

(53) Outdoor nature and indoor surroundings offer endless
color illustrations. Birds, flowers, minerals, and the objects in
daily use take on a new interest when their varied colors are
brought into a conscious relation, and clearly named. A tri-
dimensional perception, like this sense of color, requires skilful
training, and each lesson must be simplified to the last point
practicable. It must not be too long, and should lead to some
definite result which a child can grasp and express with
tolerable accuracy, while its difficulties should be approached
by easy stages, so as to avoid failure or discouragement.
The success of the present effort is the best incentive to further
achievement.

Chapter III.

COLOR MIXTURE AND BALANCE.

All colors grasped in the hand.

(54) Let us recall the names and order of colors given in the
last chapter, with their assemblage in a sphere by the three qual-
ities of HUE, VALUE, and CHROMA. It will aid

vvKMi^ the memory to call the thumb of the left hand

RED, the forefinger yellow, the middle finger
OREEN, the ring finger blue, and the little
finger purple (Fig. 6). When the finger
tips are in a circle, they represent a circuit of
"i ' hues, which has neither beginning nor end, for
we can start with any finger and trace a se-
quence forward or backward. Now close the tips together for
white, and imagine that the five strong hues have slipped down
to the knuckles, where they stand for the equator of the color
sphere. Still lower down at the wrist is black.

(55) The hand thus becomes a color holder, with white at the
finger tips, black at the wrist, strong colors around the outside,
and weaker colors within the hollow. Each finger is a scale of its
own color, with white above and black below, while the graying
of all the hues is traced by imaginary lines which meet in the
middle of the hand. Thus a child's hand may be his substitute
for the color sphere, and also make him realize that it is filled with

28 MIXTURE & BALANCE

grayer degrees of the outside colors, all of which melt into gray

in the centre.

Veigbborly and opposite hoes ; and their miztuie.

(56) Let this circle (Fig, 7) stand for the equator of the color
sphere with the five principal hues (written by their initials R, Y,

6, B, and P) spaced evenly about it. Some
colors are neighbors, as red and yellow, while
others are opposites. As soon as a child ex-
periments with paints, he will notice the dif-
ferent results obtained by mixing them.

First, the neighbors (that is, any pair which
lie next one another, as red and yellow) will
unite to make a hue which retains a sugges-
tion of both. It is intermediaie between red and yellow, and we

call it YELLOW-RED.

(57) Green and yellow unite to form oreen-tellow, blue and
green make blue-oreen, and so on with each succeeding pair.
These intermediates are to be written by their initials, and inserted
in their proper place between the principal hues. It is as if an
orange (paragraph 9) were split in ten sectors instead of
five, with red, yellow, green, blue, and purple as alternate
sectors, while half of each adjoining color pair unites in
the sector between them. The original order of five hues is in no
wise disturbed, but linked together by five intermediate steps.

(58) Here is a table of the intermediates made by mixing each
pair: —

Red and yellow unite to form yellow-red (YR), popularly called orange.
Yellow and green unite to form green-yellow (GY), popularly called grass green.
Green and blue unite to form blue-^een (BG), popularly called peacock blue.
Blue and purple imite to form purple-blue (PB), popularly called violet.
Purple and red unite to form red-purple (RP), popularly called plum.

MIXTURE & BALANCE 29

Using the left hand again to hold colors, the principal hues re-
main unchanged on the knuckles, but in the hollows between them
are placed intermediate hues, so that the circle now reads: red,
yellow-red, yellow, green-yellow, green, blue-green, blue, purple-
blue, purple, and red-purple, back to the red with which we started.
This circuit is easily memorizedy so that the child may begin with
any color point, and repeat the series clock wise (that is, from left
to right) or in reverse order.

(59) Each principal hue has thus made two close neighbors
by mixing with the nearest principal hue on either hand. The
neighbors of red are a yellow-red on one side and a purple-red on
the other. The neighbors of green are a green-yellow on one
hand and a blue-green on the other. It is evident that a still
closer neighbor could be made by again mixing each consecutive
pair in this circle of ten hues; and, if the process were continued
long enough, the color steps would become so fine that the eye
could see only a circuit of hues melting imperceptibly one into
another.

(60) But it is better for the child to gain a fixed idea of red,
yellow, green, blue, and purple, with their intermediates, before
attempting to mix pigments, and these ten steps are sufficient for
primary education.

(61) Next comes the question of opposites in this circle. A
line drawn from red, through the centre, finds its opposite, blue-
green. If these colors are mixed, they unite to form gray.
Indeed, the centre of the circle stands for a middle gray, not only
because it is the centre of the neutral axis between black and
white, but also because any pair of opposites will unite to form
gray.

MIXTURE & BALANCE

(62) This is a table of five mixtures which make neutral gray:
Opposites

" Red & Blue-green
Yellow Purple-blue
Green Red7purple
Blue Yellow-red

^ Purple Green-yellow ^

Each pair of which unites in neutral
gray.

(63) But if, instead of mixing these opposite hues, we place
them side by side, the eye is so stimulated by their difference that
each seems to gain in strength; i.e., each enhances the other when
separate, but destroys the other when mixed. This is a very in-
teresting point to be more fully illustrated by the help of a color
wheel in Chapter V., paragraph 106. What we need to re-
member is that the mixture of neighborly hues makes them less
stimulating to the eye, because they resemble each other,
while the mixture of opposite hues extinguishes both in a neutral
gray.

Hues once remoyed, and their mixture.

(64) There remains the question, What will happen if we mix,
not two neighbors, nor two opposites, but a pair of hues once re-
moved in the circle^ such as red and green ? A
line joining this pair does not pass through the
neutral centre, but to one side nearer yellow,
which shows' that this mixture falls between
gray and yellow, partaking somewhat of each.
In the same way a line joining yellow and blue
shows that their mixture contains both green
and gray. Indeed, any line joining two colors

in the circuit may be said to describe their union. A radius
through this middle point passes to a hue on the circum-
ference, and describes by its intersection with the first line

MIXTURE & BALANCE

the chroma of the color made by a mixture of the two original
colors.

Red & Green make Yellow-gray '

Yellow Blue Green-gray

Green Purple Blue-gray >- Each pair unites in a colored gray.

Blue Red Purple-gray

Purple Yellow Red-gray

Mixture of white and black : a scale of grays.

{p5) So far we have thought only of the plane of the equator,
with its circle of middle hues in ten steps, and studied their mixt-
ure by drawing lines to join them. Now let
us start at the neutral centre, and think upward
to white and downward to black (Fig. 9).

This vertical line is the neutral axis joining
the poles of white and black, which represent
the opposites of light and darkness, with middle
gray half-way between. K black is called 0,
and white is 10, then the middle point is 5,
with 6, 7, 8, and 9 above, while 4, 3, 2, and 1 are below, thus mak-
ing a vertical scale of grays from black to white (Chapter II.,
paragraph 25).

As it will soon be necessary to talk of the values in each color,
we may distinguish the values on this neutral axis from color
values by writing them N^, N^, N^, NS N^ N«, N^ N^, N^
N^^ . Such a scale makes it easy to foresee the result of mixing
light values with dark ones. Any two gray values unite to form
a gray midway between them. Thus N* and N^ being equally
above and below the centre, unite to form N^, as will also N^
and N8, N^ and N^, or N» and N^. But N» and N« will unite
to form N® , which is midway between 6 and 9.

82 MIXTURE & BALANCE

(66) When this numbered scale of values is familiar, it serves
not only to describe light and dark grays, but the value of colors
which are at the same level in the scale. Thus R*^ (popularly
called a tint of red) is no lighter or darker than the gray of N^.
Indeed, a numeral written above to the right will always be the
vcducy whether of a gray or a color, so that R^, R*, R^, R*, R^,
R®, R'^, R^, R®, describes a regular scale of red values from black
to white, while G^, G^, G®, etc., is a scale of green values.

(67) This matter of a notation for colors will be more fully
worked out in Chapter VI., but the letters and nimierals already
described greatly simplify what we are about to consider in the
mixture and balance of colors.

Mixture of light hues with dark hues.

(68) Now that we are supplied with a decimal scale of grays,
represented by divisions of the neutral axis (N^, N^, etc.), and

a corresponding decimal scale of value for each
of the ten hues ranged about the equator (R^,
and so on), traced by ten equidistant meridians
from white to black, it is not difficult to fore-
see what the mixture of any two colors will
produce, whether they are of the same level
of value, as in the colors of the equator already
considered, or whether they are of different levels.

(69) For instance, let us mix a light yellow (Y^) with a dark-
red (R*). They are neighbors in hue, but well removed in value.
A line joining them centres at YR^ . This describes the result of
their mixture, — a value intermediate between 7 and 3, with a
hue intermediate between R and Y. It is a yellow-red of middle
value, popularly called "dark orange." But, while this term

MIXTURE & BALANCE

''dark orange" rarely means the same color to three different
people, these measured scales give to YR^ an unmistakable mean-
ing, just as the musical scale gives an unmistakable significance
to the notes of its score.

(70) Evidently, this way of writing colors by their degrees of
value and hue gives clearness to what would otherwise be hard to
express by the color terms in common use.

(71) K Y^ and R** be chosen for mixture, we know at once that
they unite in YR^, which is two steps of the value scale above
the middle; while Y® and R* make YR*, which is one step below
the middle. Charts prepared with this system show each of these
colors and their mixture with exactness.

(72) The foregoing mixtures of dark reds and light yellows are
typical of the union of light and dark values of any neighboring
hues, such as yellow and green, green and blue, blue and purple,
or purple and red. Next let us think of the result of mixing dif-
ferent values in opposite hues; as, for instance, YR^ and B*.
(Fig. 11). To this combination the color sphere gives a ready
answer; for the middle of a straight line through the sphere, and
joining them, coincides with the neutral centre, showing that they

balance in neutral gray. This is also true
of any opposite pair of surface hues where
the values are equally removed from the
equator.

(73) Suppose we substitute familiar
flowers for the notation, then YR'^ becomes
the buttercup, and B* is the wild violet.
But, in comparing the two, the eye is more
stimulated by the buttercup than by the violet, not alone be-
cause it is Eghter, but because it is stronger in chroma; that is,

84 MIXTURE & BALANCE

farther away from the neutral axis of the sphere, and in fact out
beyond its surface, as shown in Fig. 11.

The head of a pin stuck in toward the axis on the 7th
level of YR to represent the 9th step in the scale of chroma is
the buttercup, while the "modest** violet has a chroma of only 4,
as shown by its position on the sphere, nearer to the neutral axis
than the brilliant buttercup by five steps of chroma. This is the
third dimension of color, and must be included in our notation.
So we write the buttercup YR^ and the violet Bf , — chroma al-
ways being written below to the right of hue, and value always

above. (This is the invariable order hub . )

CHROMA /

(74) A line joining the head of the pin mentioned above with
Bf does not pass through the centre of the sphere, and its middle
point is nearer the buttercup than the neutral axis, showing that
the hues of the buttercup and violet do not balance in gray.

The neutral centre is a balancing point for colors.

(75) This raises the question, What is balance of color? Ar-
tists criticise the color schemes of paintings as being "too light
or too dark** (unbalanced in value), "too weak or too strong**
(unbalanced in chroma), and "too hot or too cold** (unbalanced
in hue), showing that this is a fundamental idea underlying all
color arrangements.

(76) Let us assume that the centre of the sphere is the natural
balancing point for all colors (which will be best shown by Max-
well discs in Chapter V., paragraphs 106-112), then color points
equally removed from the centre must balance one another. Thus
white balances black. Lighter red balances darker blue-gi*een.
Middle red balances middle blue-green. In short, every straight
line through this centre indicates opposite qualities that balance

MIXTURE & BALANCE 35

one another. The color points so found are said to be **com'
plemerUaryy** for each supplies what is needed to complement
or balance the other in hue, value, and chroma.

(77) The true complement of the buttercup, then, is not the
violet, which is too weak in chroma to balance its strong chroma.
We have no blue flower that can equal the chroma of the butter-
cup. Some other means must be found to produce a balance.
One way is to use more of the weaker color. Thus we can make
a bunch of buttercups and violets, using twice as many of the
latter, so that the eye sees an area of blue twice as great as the
area of yellow-red. Area as a compensation for inequalities of
hue, value, and chroma will be further described under the har-
mony of color in Chapter VII.

(78) But, before leaving this illustration of the buttercup and
violet, it is well to consider another color path connecting them,
which does not pass through the sphere, bid around it (Fig. 12).
Such a path swinging around from yellow-red to blue slants down-
ward in value, and passes through yellow, green-yellow, green,
and blue-green, tracing a sequence of hue^ of which each step is
less chromatic than its predecessor.

This diminishing sequence is easily written thus, — ^YRf , Y|^,
GYf , G|, BG|, B|,— and is shown graphically in Fig. 12. Its

hue sequence is described by the initials
YR, Y, GY, G, BG, and B. Its
^ value-sequence appears in the upper
numerals, 8, 7, 6, 5, 4, and 3, while
the chroma-sequence is included in the
lower numerals, 9, 8, 7, 6, 5, and 4.
This gives a complete statement of
the sequence, defining its pecuUarity, that at each change

36 MIXTURE & BALANCE

of hue there is a regular decrease of value and chroma. Nature
seems to be partial to this sequence, constantly reiterating it in
yellow flowers with their darker green leaves and underlying
shadows. In spring time she may contract its range, making the
blue more green and th^ yellow less red, but in autumn she seems
to widen the range, presenting strong contrasts of yellowish-red
and purple-blue.

(79) Every day she plays upon the values of this sequence,
from the strong contrasts of light and shadow at noon to the hardly
perceptible differences at twilight. The chroma of this sequence
expands during the summer to strong colors, and contracts in
winter to grays. Indeed, Nature, who would seem to be the
source of our notions of color harmony, rarely repeats herself, yet
is endlessly balancing inequaUties of hue, value, and chroma by
compensations of quantity.

(80) So subtle is this equilibrium that it is taken for granted
and forgotten, except when some violent disturbance disarranges
it, such as an earthquake or a thunder-storm.

The triple nature of color balance illustrated.

(81) The simplest idea of balance is the equilibrium of two
halves of a stick supported at its middle point. If one end is
heavier than the other, the support must be moved nearer to that
end.

But, since color unites three qualities, we must seek some type
of triple balance. The game of jackstraws illustrates this, when
the disturbance of one piece involves the displacement of two
others. The action of three children on a floating plank or the
equilibrium of two acrobats carried on the shoulders of a third
may also serve as examples.

(82) Triple balance may be graphically shown by three discs

MIXTURE & BALANCE 37

in contact, Two of them are suspended by their centres, while
they remain in touch with a third supported on a pivot, as in
Fig. 14. Let us call the lowest disc Hue (H),
^ and the lateral discs Value (V) and Chroma

4 u^Wv^ (C). Any dip or rotation of the lower disc H
will induce sympathetic action in the two lateral
discs V and C. When H is inclined, both V
and C change their relations to it. If H is raised
f^ ' vertically, both V and C dip outward. If H is
rotated, both V and C rotate, but in opposite
directions. Indeed, any disturbance of V affects H and C, while
H andV respond to any movement of C. So we must be prepared
to realize that any change of one color quality involves readjust-
ment of the other two.

(83) Color balance soon leads to a study of optics in one direc-
tion, to aesthetics in another, and to mathematical proportions in
a third, and any attempt at an easy solution of its problems is not
likely to succeed. It is a very complicated question, whose closest
counterpart is to be sought in musical rhythms. The fall of
musical impulses upon the ear can make us gay or sad, and there
are color groups which, acting through the eye, can convey pleas-
ure or pain to the mind.

(84) A colorist is keenly alive to these feelings of satisfaction
or annoyance, and consciously or unconsciously he rejects certain
combinations of color and accepts others. Successful pictures
and decorative schemes are due to some sort of balance uniting
"light and shade** (value), "warmth and coolness** (hue), with
"brilliancy and grayness** (chroma); for, when they fail to please,
the mind at once begins to search for the unbalanced quality, and
complains that the color is " too hot, ** " too dark,** or " too crude.**

S8 MIXTURE & BALANCE

This effort to establish pleasing proportions may be unconscious
in one temperament, while it becomes a matter of definite analysis
in another. Emerson claimed that the unconscious only is com-
plete. We gladly permit those whose color instinct is unerring —
(and how few they are) ! — to neglect all rules and set formulas.
But education is concerned with the many who have not this gift.

(85) Any real progress in color education must come not from
a blind imitation of past successes, but by a study into the laws
which they exemplify. To exactly copy fine Japanese prints or
Persian rugs or Renaissance tapestries, while it cultivates an ap-
preciation of their refinements, does not give one the power to
create things equally beautiful. The masterpieces of music cor-
rectly rendered do not of necessity make a composer. The musi-
cian, besides the study of masterpieces, absorbs the science of
counterpoint, and records by an unmistakable notation the exact
character of any new combination of musical intervals which he
conceives.

(86) So must the art of the colorist be furnished with a scien-
tific basis and a clear form of color notation. This will record
the successes and failures of the past, and aid in the search, by
contrast and analysis, for the fundamentals of color balance.
Without a measured and systematic notation, attempts to de-
scribe color harmony can only produce hazy generalities of little
value in describing our sensations, and fail to express the essential
differences between "good" and "bad** color.

Chapteb IV.

PRISMATIC COLOR.

Pore color ia seen in the epectrom of eanlight.

(87) The strongest sensation of color is gained in a darkened
room, with a prism used to split a beam of sunlight into its vari-
ous wave lengths. Through a narrow slit
there enters a straight pencil of light
which we are accustomed to think of as
white, alhough it is a bundle of variously
colored rays (or waves of ether) whose
union and balance is so perfect that no
single ray predominates.

(88) Cover the narrow slit, and we are
plunged in darkness. Admit the beam,
and the eye feels a powerful contrast between the spot of light
on the floor and its surrounding darkness. Place a triangular
glass prism near the slit to intercept the beam of white light, and
suddenly there appears on the opposite wall a band of briUiant
colors. This deUghtful experiment rivets the eye by the beauty
and purity of its hues. All other colors seem weak by com-
parison. Their weakness is due to impurity, for all pigments
and dyes contain portions of hues other than their dominant one,
which tend to ^'gray'* them and diminish their chroma.

(89) But prismatic color is pure, or veiy nearly so, because .the

40 PRISMATIC COLOR

shape of the glass refracts each hue» and separates it by the length
of its ether wave. These waves have been measured, and science
can name each hue by its wave length. Thus a certain red is
known as M. 6867, and a certain green sensation is M. 5^69* With-
out going veiy far into this scientific analysis of color, let it be said
that Sir Isaac Newton made a series of experiments in 1687, and
was privileged to name this color sequence by seven steps which
he called red, orange, yellow, green, blue, violet, and indigo.
Later a scientist named Frauenhofer discovered fine black lines
crossing the solar spectrum, and marked them with letters of the
alphabet from a to h. These with the wave length serve to locate
every hue and define every step in the sequence. Since Newton's
time it has been proved that only three of the spectral hues are
primary^ while their mixture produces all other gradations. The
primary sensations are a red, a green, and a violet-blue. By re-
ceiving the spectrum on a screen with fine slits that fit the red and
green waves, so that they alone pass through, they can be received
on mirrors inclined at such an angle as to unite them on another
screen, when, instead of red and green, the eye sees only yellow.f
(90) A similar arrangement of slits and mirrors for the green
and violet-blue proves that they unite to make blue, while a third
experiment shows that the red and violet-blue can unite to make

*See Micron in Qloaaary.

t The fact that the spectral union of red and green makes yellow is a matter of sur-
prise to practical workers in color who are familiar with the action of pigments, but un-
familiar with spectrum analysis. Yellow seems to them a primary and indispensable color,
because it cannot be made by the union of red and green pigments. Another surprise is
awaiting them when they hear that the yellow and blue of the spectrum make whiU^ for
all their experience with paints goes to prove that yellow and blue unite to form green.
Attention is called to this difference between the mixture of colored light and of colored
pigments, not with the idea of explaining it here, but to emphasize their difference; for in
the next chapter we shall describe the practical making of a color sphere with pigments,
which would be quite impractical, oould we have ouly the colors of the spectrum to work
with.

PRISMATIC COLOR 41

purple. So yellow, blue, and purple are called secondaiy hues
because they result from the mixture of the three primaries, red,
green, and violet-blue.

In comparing these two color lists, we see that the *^ indigo **
and ** orange** of Sir Isaac Newton have been discarded. Both
are indefinite, and refer to variable products of the vegetable king-
dom. Violet is also borrowed from the same kingdom; and, in
order to describe a violet, we say it is a purple violet or blue violet,
as the case may be, just as we describe an orange as a red orange
or a yellow orange. Their color difference is not expressed by
the terms "orange" or "violet," but by the words **red,'*
" yellow," " blue," or " purple," all of which are true color names
and arouse an unmixed color image.

(91) In the nursery a child learns to use the simple color
names red, yellow, green, blue, and purple. When famiUarity
with the color sphere makes him relate them to each other and
place them between black and white by their degree of light and
strength, there will be no occasion to revert to vegetables, ani-
mals, minerals, or the ever-varying hues of sea and sky to express
his color sensations.

(9^) Another experiment accentuates the di£Ference between
spectral and pigment color. When the spectrum is spread on the
screen by the use of a prism, and a second prism is placed inverted
beyond the first, it regathers the dispersed rays back into their
original beam, making a white spot on the floor. This proves
that all the colored rays of light combine to balance each other
in whiteness. But if pigments which are the closest possible
imitation of these hues are united on a painter's palette, either
by the brush or the knife, they make gray^ and not white.

(93) This is another illustration of the impurity of pigments.

PRISMATIC COLOR

for, instead of uniting to form white, they form gray, which is a
darkened or impure form of white; and, lest this should be at-
tributed to a chemical reaction between the various matters that
serve as pigments, the experiment can be carried out without al-
lowing one pigment to touch another by using Maxwell discs, as
will be shown in the next chapter.

(94) Before leaving these prismatic colors, let us study them in
the light of what has already been learned of color dimensions.

Not only do they present different values,
but also different chromas. Their values
range from darkness at each end, where red
and purple become visible, to a brightness in
the greenish yellow, which is almost white.
So on the color tree described in Chapter II.,
paragraph 34, yellow has the highest branch,
green is lower, red is below the middle, with
blue and purple lower down, near black.

(95) Then in chroma they range from the powerful stimulation
of the red to the soothing purple, with green occupying an inter-
mediate step. This is also given on the color tree by the length
of its branches.

(96) In Fig. 15 the vertical curve describes the values of the
spectrum as they grade from red through yellow, green, blue, and
purple. The horizontal curve describes the chromas of the spec-
trum in the same sequence; while the third curve leaning outward
is obtained by uniting the first two by two planes at right angles
to one another, and sums up the three qualities by a single descrip-
tive line. Now the red and purple ends are far apart, and science
forbids their junction because of their great difference in wave
length. But the mind is prone to unite them in order to produce

PRISMATIC COLOR 43

the red-purples which we see in clouds at sunset, in flowers and
grapes pnd the amethyst. Indeed, it has been done unhesitat*
ingly in most color schemes in order to supply the opposite of
green.

(97) This gives a slanting circuit joining all the branch ends of
the color tree, and has been Ukened to the rings of Saturn in chap-
ter I., paragraph 17.
A prismatic color sphere.

(98) « With a little effort of the imagination we can picture a
prismatic color sphere, using only the colors of light. In a cylin-
drical chamber is hung a diaphanous ball similar to a huge
soap bubble, which can display color on its surface without ob-
scuring its interior. Then, at the proper points of the surround-
ing wall, three pure beams of colored light are admitted, — one
red, another green, and the third violet-blue.

(99) They fall at proper levels on three sides of the sphere,
while their intermediate gradations encircle the sphere with a
complete spectrum plus the needed purple. As they penetrate
the sphere, they unite to balance each other in neutrality. Pure
whiteness is at the top, and, by some imaginary means that gradu-
ally diminishes their light, they disappear in darkness below.

(100) This ideal color system is impossible in the present state
of our knowledge and implements. Even were it possible, its
immaterial hues could not serve to dye materials or paint pict-
ures. Pigments are, and will in all probabiUty continue to be,
the practical agents of coloristic productions, however reluctant
the scientist may be to accept them as the basis of a color system.
It is true that they are chemically impure and imperfectly represent
the colors of light. Some of them fade rapidly and undergo
chemical change, as in the notable case of a green pigment tested

44 PRISMATIC COLOR

by this measured system, which in a few weeks lost four steps of
chroma, nearly two steps of value, and swung into a bluer hue.

(101) But the color sphere to be next described is worked out
with a few reliable pigments, mostly natural earths, whose fading
is a matter of years and so slight as to be almost imperceptible.
Besides, its principal hues are preserved in safe keeping by im-
perishable enamels, which can be used to correct any tendency of
the pigments to distort the measured intervals of the color sphere.

This meets the most serious objection to a pigment system.
Without it a child has nothing tangible which he can keep in
constant view to imitate and memorize. With it he builds up a
mental image of measured relations that describe every color in
nature, including the fleeting hues of the rainbow, although they
appear but for a moment at rare intervals. Finally, it furnishes a
simple notation which records every color sensation by a letter
and two numerals. With the enlargement of his mental power he
will unite these in a comprehensive grasp of the larger relations
of color.

Chapteb v.

A PIGMENT COLOR SPHERE *

How to make a color sphere with pigments.

(102) The preceding chapters have built up an ideal color solid»
in which every sensation of color finds its place and is clearly

named by its degree of hue, value, and
chroma.

It has been shown that the neutral centre of
the system is a balancing point for all colors,
that a line through this centre finds opposite
colors which balance and complement each
other; and we are now ready to make a
practical application, carrying out these ideal

relations of color as far as pigments will permit in a color

sphere* (Fig. 16).

(103) The materials are quite simple. First a colorless
globe, mounted so as to spin freely on its axis. Then a
measured scale of value, specially devised for this purpose, ob-
tained by the daylight photometer.f Next a set of carefully
chosen pigments, whose reasonable permanence has been tested by
long use, and which are prepared so that they will not glisten when
spread on the surface of the globe, but give a uniformly mat surface.
A glass palette, palette knife, and some fine brushes complete the list.

^Patented Jan. 9, 1900. fPatented Nov. 19. 1901.

COLOR SPHERE

(104) Here is a list of the paints arranged in pairs to represent
the five sets of opposite hues described in Chapter HI., paragraphs

ColoT Pain,

Pigments Used,

Chemical Nature.

Red

Venetian red.

Calcined native earth.

and

Blue-green.

Viridian.

Chromium sesquioxide.

YeUow

Raw Sienna.

Native earth.

and

Purple-blue.

Ultramarine.

Artificial product.

Green

Emerald green.

Arsenate of copper.

and

Red-purple.

Purple madder.

Extract of the madder plant.

Blue

Cobalt.

Oxide of cobalt with alumina.

and

YeUow-red.

Orange cadmium.

Sulphide of cadmitun.

Purple

Madder and cobalt.

See each pigment above.

and

Green-yellow.

Emerald green and Sienna

. See each pigment above.

(105) These paints have various degrees of hue, value, and
chroma, but can be tempered by additions of the neutrals, zinc
white and ivory black, until each is brought
to a middle value and tested on the value
scale. After each pair has been thus bal-
anced, they are painted in their appropriate
spaces on the globe, forming an equator of
balanced hues.

(106) The method of proving this balance
has already been suggested in Chapter IV. ,
paragraph 93. It consist of an ingenious implement devised by
Clerk-Maxwell, which gives us a result of mixing pigments without
the chemical risks of letting tliem come in contact, and also meas*
ures accurately the quantity of each which is used (Fig. 17).

COLOR SPHERE 47

(107) This is caUed a Maxwell disc, and is nothing more than
a circle of firm cardboard, pierced with a central hole to fit the
spindle of a rotary motor, and with a radial slit from rim to centre,
so that another disc may be slid over the first to cover any desired
fraction of its surface. Let us paint one of these discs with Ve-
netian red and the other with viridian, the first pair in the list of
pigments to be used on the globe.

(108) Having dried these two discs, one is combined with the
other on the motor shaft so that each color occupies half the circle.
As soon as the motor starts, the two colors are no longer distin-
guished, and rapid rotation melts them so perfectly that the eye
sees a new color, due to their mixture on the retina. This new
color is a reddish gray, showing that the red is more chromatic
(t.e., its hue is purer and stronger) than the green. But by stop-
ping the motor and sliding the green disc to cover more of the red
one, there comes a point where rotation melts them into a per-
fectly neutral gray. No hint of either hue remains, and the pair
is said to balance.

(109) Since this balance has been obtained by unequal areas
of the two pigments, it must compensate for a lack of equal chroma
in the hues (see paragraphs 76, 77) ; and, to measure this inequality,
a slightly larger disc, with decimal divisions on its rim, is placed
back of the two painted ones. If this scale shows the red as occupy-
ing 3 J parts of the area, while blue-green occupies 6| parts, then
the blue-green must be only half as chromatic as the red, since it
takes twice as much to produce the balance.

(110) The red is then grayed (diminished in chroma by additions
of a middle gray) until it can occupy half the circle, with blue-
green on the remaining half, and still produce neutrality when
mixed by rotation. Each disc now reads 5 on the decimal scale.

48 COLOR SPHERE

Lest the graying of red should have disturbed its value, it is again
tested on the photometric scale, and reads 4.7, showing it has been
slightly darkened by the graying process. A little white is
therefore added until its value is restored to 5.

(111) The two opposites are now completely balanced, for they
are equal in value (5), equal in chroma (5), and have proved
their equality by uniting in equal areas to form a neutral mixture.
It only remains to apply them in their proper position on the
sphere.

(112) A band is traced around the equator, divided in ten equal
spaces, and lettered R, YR, Y, GY, G, BG, B, PB, P, and RP (see
Fig. 18). This balanced red and blue-green are appUed with the
brush to spaces marked R and BG, care being taken to fill, but
not to overstep the bounds, and the color laid absolutely flat, that
no unevenness of value or chroma may disturb the balance.

(113) The next pair, represented by Raw Sienna and Ultra-
marine, is similarly brought to middle value, balanced by equal
areas on the Maxwell discs, and, when correct in each quality,
is painted in the spaces Y and PB. Emerald Green and Purple
Madder, which form the next pigment pair, are similarly tempered,
proved, and applied, followed by the two remaining pairs, until
the equator of the globe presents its ten equal steps of middle hues.

An equator of ten balanced hues.

(114) Now comes the total test of this cir-
cuit of balanced hues by rotation of the sphere.

.^^i As it gains speed, the colors flash less and

less, and finally melt into a middle gray of
"^iB, perfect neutrality. Had it failed to produce
this gray and shown a tinge of any hue still
persisting, we should say that the persistent hue was in excess*

COLOR SPHERE 49

or, conversely, that its opposite hue was deficient in chroma, and
failed to preserve its share in the balance.

(115) For instance, had rotation discovered the persistence of
reddish gray, it would have proved the red too strong, or its
opposite, blue-green, too weak, and we should have been forced
to retrace our steps, applying a correction until neutrality was
established by the rotation test.

(116) This is the practical demonstration of the assertion
(chapter I., paragraph 8) that a color has three dimensions which
can be Tnea^sured, Each of these ten middle hues has proved its
right to a definite place on the color globe by its measurements of
value and chroma. Being of equal chroma, all are equidistant
from the neutral centre, and, being equal in value, all are equally
removed from the poles. If the warm hues (red and yellow) or
the cool hues (blue and green) were in excess, the rotation test of
the sphere would fail to produce grayness, and so detect its lack
of balance.

A chromatic tuning fork.

(117) The five principal steps in this color equator are made in
permanent enamel and carefully safeguarded, so that, if the pig-
ments painted on the globe should change or become soiled, it
could be at once detected and set right. These five are middle
red (so called because midway between white and black, as well
as midway between our strongest red and the neutral centre),
middle yellow, middle green, middle blue, and middle purple.
They may be called the chromatic tuning fork, for they
serve to establish the pitch of colors, as the musical tuning fork
preserves the pitch of sounds.

60 COLOR SPHERE

Completion of a pigment color sphere.

(118) When the chromatic tuning fork has thus been obtained,

the completion of the globe is only a matter of patience, for the

same method can be applied at any level in

the scale of value, and a new circuit of balanced

V^Sfe^"^^*^^ ^^^ made to conform with its position between

^^5n the poles of white and black.

--4-^ (119) The surface above and below the

HJ^/ equatorial band is set off by parallels to match

^^^ ,, the photometric scale, making nine bands or

* value zones in all, of which the equator is fifth,

the black pole being 0 and the white pole 10.

(120) Ten meridians carry the equatorial hues across all these
value zones and trace the gradation of each hue through a com-
plete scale from black to white, marked by their values, as shown in
paragraph 68. Thus the red scale is R^ R^ , R^ , R* , R^ (middle
red), R® , R^ , R® , and R^ , and similarly with each of the other hues.
When the circle of hues corresponding to each level has been
applied and tested, the entire surface of the globe is spread with
a logical system of color scales, and the eye gratified with regular
sequences which move by measured steps in each direction.

(121) Each meridian traces a scale of value for the hue in which
it lies. Each parallel traces a scale of hue for the value at whose
level it is drawn. Any oblique path across these scales traces a
regular sequence, each step combining change of hue with a change
of value and chroma. The more this path approaches the verti-
cal, the less are its changes of hue and the more its changes of
value and chroma; while, the nearer it comes to the horizontal, the
less are its changes of value and chroma, while the greater become
its changes of hue. Of these two oblique paths the first may be

COLOR SPHERE 51

called that of a Luminist, or painter like Rembrandt, whose can-
vases present great contrasts of light and shade, while the second
is that of the Colorist, such as Titian, whose work shows great
fulness of hues without the violent extremes of white and black.
Total balance of the sphere teeted by rotation on any deeired axis.

(122) Not only does the mount of the color sphere permit its
rotation on the vertical axis (white-black), but it is so hung that
it may be spun on the ends of any desired axis, as, for instance,
that joining our first color pair, red and blue-green. With this
pair as poles of rotation, a new equator is traced through all the
values of purple on one side and of green-yellow on the other, which
the rotation test melts in a perfect balance of middle gray, proving
the correctness of these values. In the same way it may be hung
and tested on successive axes, until the total balance of the entire
spherical series is proved.

(123) But this color system does not cease with the colors
spread on the surface of a globe. The first illustration of an orange
filled with color was chosen for the purpose of stimulating the
imagination to follow a surface color inward to the neutral axis
by regular decrease of chroma. A slice at any level of the solid,
as at value 8 (Fig. 19), shows each hue of that level passing by
even steps of increasing grayness to the neutral gray N^ of the axis.
In the case of red at this level, it is easily described by the nota-
tion Rf , Rf , Rf , of which the initial and upper numerals do not
change, but the lower numeral traces loss of chroma by 3, 2, and
1 to the neutral axis.

(124) And there are stronger chromas of red outside the surface,
which can be written Rf , Rf , Rf , etc. Indeed, our color measure-
ments discover such differences of chroma in the various pigments
used, that the color tree referred to in paragraphs 34, 35, is necessary

52 COLOR SPHERE

to bring before the eye their maximum chromas, most of which are
well outside the spherical shell and at various levels of value.
One way to describe the color sphere is to suggest that a color
tree, the intervals between whose irregular branches are filled
with appropriate color, can be placed in a turning lathe and
turned down until the color maxima are removed, thus pro-
ducing a color solid no larger than the chroma of its weakest
pigment. Fig. 2.
Charts of the color solid.

(125) Thus it becomes evident that, while the color sphere is a
valuable help to the child in conceiving color relations, in uniting
the three scales of color measure, and in
T furnishing with its mount an excellent test

of the theory of color balance, yet it is always
restricted to the chroma of its weakest color,
the surplus chromas of all other colors being
thought of as enormous mountains built out
at various levels to reach the maxima of our
pigments.

(126) The complete color solid is, there-
fore, of irregular shape, with mountains and valleys, correspond-
ing to the inequalities of pigments. To display these inequalities
to the eye, we must prepare cross sections or charts of the solid,
some horizontal, some vertical, and others oblique.

(127) Such a set of charts forms an atlas of the color solid,
enabling one to see any color in its relation to all other colors,
and name it by its degree of hue, value, and chroma. Fig. 20 is
a horizontal chart of all colors which present middle value (5),
and describes by an uneven contour the chroma of every hue at
this level. The dotted inner circle is the equator of the color

COLOR SPHERE 53

sphere, whose principal hues, Rf , Yf , Gf , B|, and P|, form the
chromatic tuning fork, paragraph 117.

(128) In this single chart the eye readily distinguishes some
three hundred different colors, each of which may be written by
its hue, value, and chroma. And even the slightest variation of
one of them can be defined. Thus, if the principal red were to
fade slightly, so that it was a trifle lighter and a trifle weaker than
the enamel, it would be written R^, showing it had lightened
by 1 per cent, and weakened by 1 per cent. The discrimination
made possible by this decimal notation is much finer than our
present visual limit. Its use will stimulate finer perception of
color.

(129) Such a very elementary sketch of the Color SoHd and
Color Atlas, which is all that can be given in the confines of
this small book, will be elsewhere presented on a larger and more
complete scale. It should be contrasted with the ideal form
composed of prismatic colors, suggested in the last chapter, para-
graphs 98, 99, which was shown to be impracticable, but whose
ideal conditions it follows as far as the limitations of pigments
permit.

(130) Besides its value in education as setting all our color
notions in order, and supplying a simple method for their clear
expression, it promises to do away with much of the misunder-
standing that accompanies the every-day use of color.

(131) Our present color names are incongruous, irrational, and
often ludicrous. This year the fashionable shades are "burnt
onion** and "fresh spinach.** The florists talk of a "pink
violet** and a "green pink.** A maker of inks describes
the red as a "true crimson scarlet,** which is a contradic-
tion in terms. These and a host of other misnomers, bOT-

54 COLOR SPHERE

rowed from most heterogeneous sources, become outlawed as
sooD as the simple color names and measures of this system are
adopted.
Color anarchy is replaced by systematic color description.

Chapter VI.

COLOR NOTATION.

Snsgestioii of a chromatic scoiv.

(132) The last chapter traced a series of steps leading to the
construction of a practical color sphere. Each color was tested
by appropriate instruments to assure its degree
of hue, value and chroma, before being placed
in position. Then the total sphere was tested
to detect any lack of balance.

(133) Each color was also written by a
letter and two numerals, showing its place in
the three scales of hue, value, and chroma.
This naturally suggests, not only a record
of each separate color sensation, but also a union of these
records in series and groups to form a color score, similar to
the musical score by which the measured relations of sound are
recorded.

(134) A very simple form of color score may be easily imagined
as a transparent envelope wrapped around the equator of the
sphere, and forming a vertical cylinder (Fig. 21). On the envelope
the equator traces a horizontal centre line, which is at 5 of the valite
scale, with zones 6, 7, 8, and 9 as parallels above, and the zones
4, 3, 2, and 1 below. Through ten equidistant points on this
center line vertical lines are drawn, corresponding with the di-

56 COLOR NOTATION

visions of the hue scale, and marked R» YR, Y» 6Y, 6» BG, B,
PB, P, and RP.

(135) The transparent envelope is thus divided into one hundred
compartments, which provide for ten steps of value in each of the
ten middle colors. Now, if we cut open this envelope along one
of the verticals, — as, for instance, red-purple (RP.)» it may be
spread out, making a flat chart of the color sphere (Fig. 22).

Why green is given the centre of the score.

(136) A cylindrical envelope might be opened on any desired
meridian, but it is an advantage to have green (6) at the centre

of the chart, and it is there-
fore opened at the opposite
point, red-purple (RP.) To
the right of the green centre
are the meridians of green-
"^^fiiT yellow (GY), yellow (Y),
yellow-red (YR), and red
(R), all of which are known as warm colors, because they contain
yellow and red. To the left are the meridians of blue-green
(BG), blue (B), purple-blue (PB), and purple (P), all of which
are called cool cdors, because they contain blue. Green, being
neither warm nor cold of itself, and becoming so only by addi-
tions of yellow or of blue, thus serves as a balancing point or
centre in the hue scale.*

(137) The color score presents four large divisions or color
fields made by the intersection of the equator with the meridian
of green. Above the centre are all light colors, and below it are
all dark colors. To the right of the centre are all warm colors,

*To put thia in terms of the speetrum wave lengths, long waves at the red end of
the spectrum give the sensation of warmth, while short waves at the violet end cause the
■ensation of coolness. Midway between these extremes is the wave length of green.

i

C»/eoln\aiMg

Wigm. ttkr.Qiuk.)

COLOR NOTATION 57

and to the left are all cool colors. Middle green (5Gf ) is the
centre of balance for these contrasted qualities, recognized by all
practical color workers. The chart forms a rectangle whose
length equals the equator of the color sphere and its height equals
the axis (a proportion of 3.14 : 1), representing a union and bal-
ance of the scales of hue and of value. This provides for two
color dimensions; but, to be complete, the chart must provide
for the third dimension, chroma.

(138) Replacing the chart around the sphere and joining its
ends, so that it re-forms the transparent envelope, we may thrust
a pin through at any point until it pierces the surface of the sphere.
Indeed, the pin can be thrust deeper until it reaches the neutral
axis, thus forming a scale of chroma for the color point where it
enters (see paragraph 12). In the same way any colors on the
sphere, within the sphere, or without it, can have pins thrust into
the chart to mark their place, and the length by which each pin
projects can be taken as a measure of chroma. If the chart is
now unrolled, it retains the pins, which by their place describe the
hue and value of a color, while their length describes its chroma.
Pins Btnck into the score represent chroma.

(139) With this idea of the third color dimension incorporated
in the score we can discard the pin, and record its length by a
numeral. Any dot placed on the score marks a certain degree
of hue and value, while a numeral beside it marks the degree of
chroma which it carries, uniting with the hue and value of that
point to give us a certain color. Glancing over a series of such
color points, the eye easily grasps their individual character, and
connects them into an intelligible series.

(140) Thus a flat chart becomes the projection of the color
solid, and any color in that solid is transferred to the surface of

58 COLOR NOTATION

the chart, retaining its degrees of hue, value, and chroma. So
far the scales have been spoken of as divided into ten steps, but
they may be subdivided much finer, if desired, by use of the deci-
mal point. It is a question of convenience whether to make a
small score with only the large divisions or a much larger score with
a hundred times as many steps. In the latter case each hue has
ten steps, the middle step of hue being distinguished as 5Gf to
suggest the four steps IG, 2G, 3G, 4G, which precede it, and 6G,
7G, 8G, and 9G, which follow it toward blue-green.
The score preserves color records in a convenient shape.

Such a color score, or notation diagram, to be made small or

large as the case demands, offers a very convenient means for

recording color combinations, when pig-

y/1 ments are not at hand.

"r

y

(141) To display its three dimensions,
a little model can be Qiade with three
visiting cards, so placed as to present
y^i^,\ their mutual intersection at ri^t angles
5G^ is their centre of mutual balance. A central plane sep-
arates all colors into two contrasted fields. To the right are
all warm colors, to the left are aU cool colors. Each of these
fields is again divided by the plane of the equator into lighter
colors above and darker colors below. These four color fields
are again subdivided by a transverse plane through 5Gf into
strong colors in front and weak colors beyond or behind it.

(142) Any color group, whose record must all be written to
the right of the centre, is unduly warm, because red and yellow
are dominant. One to the left of the centre must be unduly cool,
because it is dominated by blue. A group written all above the

1 — rri

h-rrn

m

p

g

i . . (. w iVi

Spii-

s:: I I

I^III

J

u

|M

60 COLOR NOTATION

centre must be light to excess, while one written entirely below
is dark to excess. Finally, a score written all in front of the centre
represents only strong chromas, while one written behind it con-
tains only weak chromas. From this we gather that a balanced
composition of color preserves some sort of equilibrium, uniting
degrees of warm and cool, of light and dark, and of weak and strong,
which is made at once apparent by the dots on the score.

(143) A single color, like that of a violet, a rose, or a butter-
cup, appears as a dot on the score, with a numeral added for its
chroma. A parti-colored flower, such as a nasturtium, is shown
by two dots with their chromas, and a bunch of red and yellow
flowers will give by their dots a color passage, or "silhouette,**
whose warmth and lightness is unmistakable.

The chroma of each flower written with the silhouette com-
pletes the record. The hues of a beautiful Persian rug, with dark
red predominating, or a verdure tapestry, in which green is
dominant, or a Japanese print, with blue dominant, will trace
upon the score a pattern descriptive of its color qualities. These
records, with practice, become as significant to the eye of the
artist as the musical score is to the musician. The general char-
acter of a color combination is apparent at a glance, while its
degrees of chroma are readily joined to fill out the mental image.

(144) Such a plan of color notation grows naturally from the
spherical system of measured colors. It is hardly to be hoped,
in devising a color score, that it may not seem crude at first. But
the measures forming the basis of this record can be verified by
impartial instruments, and have a permanent value in the gen-
eral study of color. They also afford some definite data as to
personal bias in color estimates.

(145) This makes it possible to collect in a convenient form.

COLOR NOTATION 61

two contrasting and valuable records, one preserving such effects
of color as are generally called pleasing, and another of such
groups as are found unpleasant to the eye. Out of such material
something may be gained, more reliable than the shifting,
personal and contradictory statements about color harmony now
prevalent.

Chapter VII.

COLOR HARMONY.

Colon may be grouped to please or to give annoyance.

(146) Attempts to define the laws of harmonious color have not
attained marked success, and the cause is not far to seek. The
very sensations underlying these effects of concord or of discord
are themselves undefined. The formula of my student days — ^that
three parts of yellow, five parts of red, and eight parts of blue
would combine harmoniously — ^was unable to define the kind
of red, yellow, and blue intended; that is, the hue, value, and
chroma of each of these colors was unknown, and the formula
meant a different thing to each person who tried to use it.

(147) It is true that a certain red, green, and blue, in the pro-
portions of 5, 3, and 8, can be united on Maxwell discs to balance
in a neutral gray; but the slightest change in either the hue, value,
or chroma, of any one of them, upsets the balance. A new pro-
portion is then needed to regain the neutral mixture. This has
already been shown in the discussion of triple balance (para-
graph 82).

(148) Harmony of color has been still further complicated
by the use of terms that belong to musical harmony. Now music
is a tneasured art, and has found a set of intervals which are de-
fined scientifically. The two arts have many points of simi-
larity; and the impulses of sound waves on the ear, like those of

COLOR HARMONY 63

light waves on the eye, although far apart in the scale and differ-
ing in important particulars, are still measured vibrations of the
same ether. But the intervals of color sensation have not been
measured, like those of music, nor has their infinite variety been
organized into a fixed system.

(149) Any effort to compare certain sounds to certain colors
soon leads to the wildest vagaries.

Harmony of sound is unlike harmony of color.

(150) The poverty of color language tempts to a borrowing
from the richer terminology of music. Musical terms, such as
*' pitch, key, note, tone, chord, modulation, nocturne, and sym-
phony," are frequently used in the description of color, serving
by association to convey certain vague ideas.

(151) In the same way the term color harmony, from associa-
tion with musical harmony, presents to the mind an image of color
arrangement, — varied, yet well proportioned, grouped in orderly
fashion, and agreeable to the eye. But any attempt to define
this image in terms of color is disappointing. Here is a beauti-
ful Persian rug: why do we call it beautiful? One says "because
its colors are rich.** Why are they rich? "Because they are
deep in tone.** What does that mean? The double-bass and
the fog-horn are deep in tone, but not necessarily beautiful on that
account. "Oh, no," says another, "it is all in one harmonious
hey.** But what is a key of color ? Is it made by all the values
of one color, such as red, or by all the hues of equal value, such
as the middle hues in our color solid ?

(152) Certainly it is not, for the rug has both light and dark
colors ; and, of the reds, yellows, greens, and blues, some are stronger
and others weaker. Then what do we mean by a key of color ? One
must either continue to flounder about or frankly confess ignorance.

64 COLOR HARMONY

(153) Musical harmony explains itself in clear language. It
is illustrated by fixed and definite sound intervals, whose meas-
ured relations form the basis of musical composition. Each key
has an unmistakable character, and the written score presents
a statement that means practically the same thing to every person
of musical intelligence. But the adequate terms of color har-
mony are yet to be worked out.

Let us leave these musical analogies, retaining only the due
that a measured and orderly relation underlies the idea of harmony.
The color soUd which has been the subject of these pages is built
upon measured color relations. It unites measured scales of
hue, value, and chroma, and gives a definite color name to every
sensation from the maxima of color Ught and color strength to
their disappearance in darkness.

(154) Must it not, therefore, contain aU the elements which
can be combined to produce color harmony or color discord ?

(155) Instead of theorizing, let us experiment. As a child
at the piano, who first strikes random and widely separated notes,
but soon seeks for the intervals of a familiar air, so let us, after
roaming over the color globe and its charts, select one familiar
color, and study what others will combine with it to please the eye.

(156) Here is a grayish green stuflf for a dress, and the Kttle girl
who is to wear it asks what other cplors she may use with it. First let
us find it on our instrument, so as to realize its relation to other de-
grees of color. Its value is 6, — one step above the equator of middle
value. Its hue is green, G, and its chroma 5. It is written G|-.

(157) Color paths lead out from this point in every direction.
Where shall we find harmonious colors, where discordant, where
those paths most frequently travelled? Are there new ones still
to be explored ?

COLOR HARMONY 65

(158) There are three typical paths: one vertical^ with rapid
change of value; another lateral^ with rapid change of hue; and
a third inward^ through the neutral centre to seek the opposite
color field. All other paths are combinations of two or three of
these typical directions in the color solid.

Three typical color paths.

(159) 1. The vertical path finds only lighter and darker values
of gray-green : — " self-colors or shades,** they are generally called,

and offers a safe path, even for those de-
ficient in color sensation, avoiding all com-
plications of hue, and leaving the eye free
to estimate different degrees of a single
quality, — color light.

(160) 2. The lateral path passes through
neighboring hues on either side. In this case
it is a sequence from blue, through green into
yellow. This is simply change of hue, without change of value
or chroma if the path be level, but, by inclining it, one end of
the sequence becomes lighter, while the other end darkens. It
thus becomes an intermediate between the first and second typ-
ical paths, combining, at each step, a change of hue with a
change of value. This is more complicated, but also more inter-
esting, showing how the character of the gray-green dress wiU
be set off by a lighter hat of I^eghom straw, and further improved
by a trimming of darker blue-green. The sequence can be
made still more subtle and attractive by choosing a straw whose
yellow is stronger than the green of the dress, while a weaker
chroma of blue-green is used in the trimming. This is clearly
expressed by the notation thus: Yf , Gf , BGf , and written on the
score by three dots and their chromas, — 7, 5, and 3 (see Fig. 23).

66 COLOR HARMONY

(161) 8. The inward path which leads by increase of gray to
the neutral centre, and on to the opposite hue red-purple, RP|^,
is full of pitfalls for the inexpert. It combines great change of
hue and chroma, with small change of value.

(162) If any other color point be chosen in place of gray-green,
the same typical paths are just as easily traced, written by the
notation, and recorded on the color score.

These paths trace sequences from any point in the color solid.

(163) In the construction of the color solid we saw that its
scales were made of equal steps in hue, value, and chroma, and
tested by balance on the centre of neutral gray. Any step will
serve as a point of departure to trace regular sequences of the
three types. The vertical type is a sequence of value only. It
is somewhat tame, lacking the change of hue and chroma, but
giving a monotonous harmony of regular values. The horizon-
tal type traces a sequence of neighboring hues, less tame than the
vertical type, but monotonous in value and chroma. The in-
ward type connects opposite hues by a sequence of chroma bal-
anced on middle gray, and is more stimulating to the eyes.

(164) These paths have so far been treated as made up of equal
steps in each direction, with the accompanying idea of equal
quantities of color at each step. But by using unequal quantities
of color, the balance may be preserved by compensations to the
intervals that separate the colors (see paragraphs 109, 110).

Unequal color quantities compensated by relations of hue, value, and
chroma.

(165) Small bits of powerful color can be used to balance large
fields of weak chroma. For instance, a spot of strong reddish
purple is balanced and enhanced by a field of gray-green. So
an amethyst pin at the neck of the girFs dress will appear to ad-

COLOR HARMONY 67

vantage with the gown, and also with the L^hom straw. But
a large field of strong color, such as a cloth jacket of reddish
purple, would be fatal to the measured harmony we seek.

(166) This use of a small point of strong chroma, if repeated
at intervals, sets up a notion of rhythm; but, in order to be rhyth-
mic, there must be recurrent emphasis, *'a succession of similar
units, combining unlike elements." This quality must not be
confused with the unaccented succession, seen in a measured scale
of hue, value, or chroma.

Paper masks to isolate color intervals.

(167) A sheet of paper large enough to hide the color sphere
may be perforated with three or more openings in a straight line, and
applied against the surface, so as to isolate the steps of any se-
quence which we wish to study. Thus the sequence given in
paragraph 160, — Yf, Gf , BG^ — ^may be changed to bring it on the
surface of the sphere, when it reads Yf , G^, BGf . A mask with
round holes, spaced so as to uncover these three spots, relieves
the eye from the distraction of other colors. Keeping the centre
spot on green, the mask may be moved so as to study the effect
of changing hue or value of the other two steps in the sequence.

(168) The sequence is lightened by sliding the whole mask
upward, and darkened by dropping it lower. Then the result
of using the same intervals in another field is easily studied by
moving the mask to another part of the solid.

(169) Change of interval immediately modifies the character
of a color sequence. This is readily shown by having an under-
mask, with a long, continuous slit, and an over-mask whose per-
forations are arranged in several rows, each row giving different
spaces between the perforations. In the case of the girFs cloth-
ing, the same sequence produces quite a different effect, if two

66 COLOR HARMONY

(161) 3. The inward path which leads by increase of gray to
the neutral centre, and on to the opposite hue red-purple, RP|^,
is full of pitfalls for the inexpert. It combines great change of
hue and chroma, with small change of value.

(162) If any other color point be chosen in place of gray-green,
the same typical paths are just as easily traced, written by the
notation, and recorded on the color score.

These paths trace sequences from any point in the color solid.

(163) In the construction of the color solid we saw that its
scales were made of equal steps in hue, value, and chroma, and
tested by balance on the centre of neutral gray. Any step will
serve as a point of departure to trace regular sequences of the
three types. The vertical type is a sequence of value only. It
b somewhat tame, lacking the change of hue and chroma, but
giving a monotonous harmony of regular values. The horizon-
tal type traces a sequence of neighboring hues, less tame than the
vertical type, but monotonous in value and chroma. The in-
ward type connects opposite hues by a sequence of chroma bal-
anced on middle gray, and is more stimulating to the eyes.

(164) These paths have so far been treated as made up of equal
steps in each direction, with the accompanying idea of equal
quantities of color at each step. But by using unequal quantities
of cohTy the balance may be preserved by compensations to the
intervals that separate the colors (see paragraphs 109, 110).

Unequal color quantities compensated by relations of hue, value, and
chroma.

(165) Small bits of powerful color can be used to balance large
fields of weak chroma. For instance, a spot of strong reddish
purple is balanced and enhanced by a field of gray-green. So
an amethyst pin at the neck of the girPs dress will appear to ad-

COLOR HARMONY ^^ ^

vantage with the gown, and also with the L^hom straw. But
a large field of strong color, such as a doth jacket of reddish
purple, would be fatal to the measured harmony we seek.

(166) This use of a small point of strong chroma, if repeated
at intervals, sets up a notion of rhythm; but, in order to be rhyth-
mic, there must be recurrent emphasis, ^a succession of similar
units, combining unlike elements." This quality must not be
confused with the unaccented succession, seen in a measured scale
of hue, value, or chroma.

Paper masks to isolate color intervals.

(167) A sheet of paper large enough to hide the color sphere
may be perforated with three or more openings in a straight line, and
applied against the surface, so as to isolate the steps of any se-
quence which we wish to study. Thus the sequence given in
paragraph 160, — ^Yf , Gf, BGJ — ^may be changed to bring it on the
surface of the sphere, when it reads Yf , Gf , BGf . A mask with
round holes, spaced so as to uncover these three spots, relieves
the eye from the distraction of other colors. Keeping the centre
spot on green, the mask may be moved so as to study the effect
of changing hue or value of the other two steps in the sequence.

(168) The sequence is lightened by sliding the whole mask
upward, and darkened by dropping it lower. Then the result
of using the same intervals in another field is easily studied by
moving the mask to another part of the solid.

(169) Change of interval immediately modifies the character
of a color sequence. This is readily shown by having an under-
mask, with a long, continuous slit, and an over-mask whose per-
forations are arranged in several rows, each row giving different
spaces between the perforations. In the case of the girrs cloth-
ing, the same sequence produces quite a different effect, if two

68 COLOR HARMONY

perforations of the over-mask are brought nearer to select a lighter
yellow-green dress, while the ends of the sequence remain un-
changed. To move the middle perforation near the other end,
selects a darker bluish green dress, on which the trimming will
be less contrasted, while the hat appears brighter than before,
because of greater contrast.

(170) The variations of color sequence which can thus be
studied out by simple masks are almost endless; yet upon a meas-
ured system the character of each effect is easily described, and,
if need be, preserved by a written record.

Invention of color groups.

(171) Experiments with variable masks for the selection of
color intervals, such as have been described, soon stimulate the
imagination, so that it conceives sequences through any part of
the color solid. The color image becomes a permanent mental
adjunct. Five middle colors, tempered with white and black,
permit us to devise the greatest variety of sequences, some light,
others dark, some combining small difference of chroma ^th
large difference of hue, others uniting large intervals of chroma
with small intervals of hue, and so on through a well-nigh inex-
haustible series.

(172) As this constructive imagination gains power, the solid
and its charts may be laid aside. We can now think color con-
secutively. Each color suggests its place in the system, and may
be taken as a point of departure for the invention of groups to
carry out a desired relation.

(173) This selective mental process is helped by the score de-
scribed in the last chapter; and the quantity of each color chosen
for the group is easily indicated by a variable circle, drawn round
the various points on the diagram. Thus, in the case of the child's

COLOR HARMONY 69

clothes, a large circle around G^ gives the area of that color as
compared with smaller circles around Y^ and BG|^, representing
the area of the straw and the trimming.

(174) liVhen the plotting of color groups has become instinc-
tive from long practice, it opens a wide field of color study. Take
as illustration the wings of butterflies or the many varieties of pan-
sies. These fascinating color schemes can be written with indi-
cations of area that record their differences by a simple diagram.
In the same way, rugs, tapestries, mosaics, — ^whatever attracts
by its beauty and harmony of color, — can be recorded and studied
in measured terms; and the mental process of estimating hues,
values, chromas, and areas by established scales must lead the
color sense to finer and finer perceptions.

The same process serves as well to record the most annoying
and inharmonious color groups. When sufficient of these records
have been obtained, they furnish definite material for a contrast
of the color combinations which please, with those that cause dis-
gust. Such a contrast should discover some broad law of color
harmony. It will then be in measured terms which can be
clearly given; not a vague personal statement, conveying different
meanings to each one who hears it.
Constant exercise needed to train the color sense.

(175) Appreciation of beautiful color grows by exercise and
discrimination, just as naturally as fine perception of music or
literature. Each is an outlet for the expression of taste, — ^a lan-
guage which may be used clumsily or with skill.

(176) As color perception becomes finer, it discards the more
crude and violent contrasts. A child revels in the strongest
chromas he can find. The mark of the colorist is ability to em-
ploy low chroma without impoverishing the color effect. As a

70 COLOR HARMONY

boy's shrieks and groans can be tempered to musical utterance,
so his debauches in violent red, green, and purple must be replaced
hj tempered hues.

(177) Raphael, Titian, Velasquez, Corot, Chavannes, and
Whistler are masters in the use of gray. Personal bias may lead
one a little more toward warm color, and another slightly toward
the cool field, in each case attaining a sense of harmonious bal-
ance by tempered degrees of value and chroma.

(178) It is not claimed that discipline in the use of subtle colors
will make another Corot or Velasquez, but it will make for com-
prehension of their skill. It is grotesque to watch a gaudily dressed
person going into ecstasies over the delicate coloring of a Botti-
celli, when the internal as well as the external evidence is against
them.

(179) The colors which we choose, not only in personal apparel,
but in our rooms and decorations, are mute witnesses to a stage
of color perception.

If that perception is trained to finer distinctions, the mind can
no longer be content T/vith coarse expression. It begins to feel
an incongruity between the "loud" color of the wall paper, bought
because it was fashionable, and the quiet hues of the rug, which
was a gift from some artistic friend. It sees that, although the
furniture is covered with durable and costly materials, their color
"swears** at that of the curtains and wood-work. In short, the
room has been jumbled together at various periods, without any
plan or sense of color design.

(180) Good taste demands that a room be furnished, not alone
for convenience and comfort, but also with an eye to the beauty
of the various objects, so that, instead of confusing and destroy-
ing the colors, each may enhance the other. And, when this

COLOR HARMONY 71

sense of color hannony is aroused, it selects and arranges the books,
the rugs, the lamp shade, the souvenirs of travel and friendship,
the wall paper, pictures, and hangings, so that they fit into a color
scheme, not only charming to the eye at first glance, but which
continues to please the mind as it traces out an intelligent plan,
bringing all into general harmony.

(181) Nor will this cease when one room has been put to rights.
Such a coloristic attitude is not satisfied until the vista into the
next apartment is made attractive. Or should there be a suite
of rooms, it demands that, with variety in each one, they all be
brought into harmonious sequence. Thus the study of color
finds immediate and practical use in daily life. It is a needed
discipline of color vision, in the sense that geometry is a disci-
pline of the mind, and it also enters into the pleasure and re-
finement of life at every step. Skill or awkwardness in its use
exerts as positive an influence upon us as do the harmonies and
discords of sound, and a far more continuous one. It is thought
a defect to be unmusical. Should it not be considered a mark
of defective cultivation to be insensitive to color ?

(182) In this slight sketch of color education it has been as-
sumed that we are to deal with those who have normal percep-
tions. But there are some who inherit or develop various degrees
of color-blindness; and, although such cases are happily rare,
a word in their behalf may be opportune.

(183) A case of total color-blindness I have never seen, but
a few are on record. When a child shows marks of this failing,
a little care may save him much discomfort, and it may nearly
disappear with patient training. If he mismatches some hues,
confuses their names, seems incapable of the finer distinctions of
color, study to find the hues which he estimates well, and then

72 COLOR HARMONY

help him to venture a little into the field where his perception is
at fault. Some improvement is pretty sure to follow when this
is sympathetically done. One student, who never outgrew the
habit of giving a purplish hue to all his work, despite the use of
various lights and colored objects to correct it, is the single ex-
ception among hundreds whom it has been my privilege to watch
as they improved their first crude estimates, and learned to ex-
press their feeling for the subtlety of Nature's coloring.

(184) To sum up, the first chapter suggests a measured color
system in place of guess-work. The next describes the three color
qualities, and sketches a child's growth in color perception. The
tliird tells how colors may be mingled in such proportions as to
balance. After the impracticability of using spectral color has
been shown in the fourth chapter, the fifth proceeds to build a
practical color solid. The sixth provides for a written record
of color, and the last applies all that has preceded to suggestions
for the study of color harmony.

(185) Wide gaps appear in this outline. There is much that
deserves fuller treatment. But, if the search for refined color
and a clearer outlook upon its relations are stimulated by this
fragmentary sketch, some of its faults may be overlooked.

APPENDIX.

GLOSSARY OF COLOB TERMS.

A COLOR SYSTEM AND COURSE OF STUDY BASED

ON THE COLOR SOLID AND ITS CHARTS.

INDEX.

GLOSSARY.

The color definitions here employed have been taken from the
Century Dictionary. Special attention is called to the cross refer-
ences which serve to differentiate HUE^ VALUE, and CHROMA,

After Image. — An image perceived after withdrawing the eye
from a brilliantly illuminated object. Such images are
called positive when their colors are the same as that of
the object, and negative when they are its complementary
colors.

Blue. — Of the color of the clear sky; of the color of the spectrum
between wave lengths .505 and .415 micron, and more es-
pecially .487 and .460; or of such light mixed with white;
azure, cerulean.

Black. — Possessing in the highest degree the property of absorb-
ing light; reflecting and transmitting little or no light; of the
color of soot or coal; of the darkest possible hue; sable. Op-
tically, wholly destitute of color, or absolutely dark, whether
from the absence or the total absorption of light. Opposed
to white.

Bhown. — ^A dark color, inclined to red or yellow, obtained by
mixing red, black, and yellow.

CHROMA. — The degree of departure of a color sensation from
that of white or gray ; the intensity of distinctive hue ; color
intensity.

Chromatic. — ^Relating to or of the nature of color.

Cobalt Blue. — ^A pure blue tending toward cyan blue and of
high luminosity; also called Hungary blue, Lethner*s blue»
and Paris blue.

Color. — Objectively, that quality of a thing or appearance which
is perceived by the eye alone, independently of the fonn of
the thing; subjectively, a sensation peculiar to the organ of
vision, and arising from the optic nerve.

CoLOB Constants. — ^The numbers which measure the quantities,
as well as any other system of three numbers for defining
colors, are called constants of color.

Color Vabla^les. — Colors vary in chroi^ia, or freedom from ad-
mixture of white light; in brightness, or luminosity; and in
HUE, which roughly corresponds to the mean wave length of
the light emitted.

Color Blindness. — Incapacity for perceiving colors, independent
of the capacity for distinguishing light and shade.

Colors, Primary. — ^The red, green, and violet light of the spec-
trum, from the mixture of which all other colors can be pro-
duced. Also called fundamental colors.

Dyestuffs. — In commerce, any dyewood, lichen, or dyecake used
in dyeing and straining.

Electric Light. — Light produced by electricity and of two
general kinds, the arc light and the incandescent Ught. In
the first the voltaic arc is employed. In the second a resisting
conductor is rendered incandescent by the current.

Enamel. — In the fine arts a vitreous substance or glass, opaque
or transparent, and variously colored, applied as a coating
on a surface of metal or of porcelain.

Grating, Diffraction. — ^A series of fine parallel lines on
a surface of glass, or polished metal, ruled very close to-
gether, at the rate of 10,000 to 20,000 or even 40,000 to
the inch; distinctively called a diffraction or a diffraction
grating.

Gray. — ^A color having little or no distinctive hue (chroma)
and only moderate luminosity.

Green. — ^The color of ordinary foliage; the color seen in the
solar spectrum between wave-lengths 0.511 and 0.543 micron.

Emerald Green. — ^A highly chromatic and extraordinarily lu-
minous green of the color of the spectrum at wave length
0.5S4 micron. It recalls the emerald by its brilliancy, but
not by its tint; applied generally to the aceto-arsenate of
copper. Usually known as Paris green.

HUE. — Specifically and technically, distinctive quality of color-
ing in an object or on a surface ; the respect in which red,
yellow, green, blue, etc., differ one from another; that in
which colors of equal luminosity and chroma may differ.

Indigo. — ^The violet-blue color of the spectrum, extending, ac-
cording to Helmholtz, from G two-thirds of the way to F in
the prismatic spectrum. The name was introduced by New-
ton, but has lately been discarded by the best writers.

Light. — ^Adjective applied to colors highly luminous and more or
less deficient in chroma.

Luminosity. — Specifically, the intensity of light in a color, meas-
ured photometrically; that is to say, a standard light has its
intensity, or vis viva^ altered, until it produces the impression
of being equally bright with the color whose light is to be
determined; and the measure of the vis viva of the altered
Ught, relatively to its standard intensity, is then taken as the
luminosity of the color in question.

Maxwell Color Discs. — ^Discs having each a single color, and
slit radially so that one may be made to lap over another to
any desired extent. By rotating these on a spindle, the effect of
combining certain colors in varying proportions can be studied*

Micron. — ^The millionth part of a metre, or ^^\(^(^ of an English
inch. The term has been formally adopted by the Inter-
national Conunission of Weights and Measures, representing
the eiviUzed nations of the world, and is adopted by all me-
trologists.

Orange. — ^A reddish yellow color, of which the orange is the type.

Vision, Persistence of. — ^The continuance of a visual impression
upon the retina of the eye after the exciting cause is removed.
The length of time varies with the intensity of the hght and
the excitabiUty of the retina, and ordinarily is brief, though the
duration may be for hours, or even days. The after image
may be either positive or negative, the latter when the bright
part appears dark and the colored parts in their corresponding
contrast colors. It is because of this persistence that, for
example, a firebrand moved very rapidly appears as a band
or circle of light.

Photometer. — ^An instrument used to measure the intensity of
light. Specifically, to compare the relative intensities of the
Ught emitted from various sources.

Pigment. — ^Any substance that is or can be used by painters to
impart color to bodies.

Pink. — ^A red color of low chroma, but high luminosity, inclining
toward purple.

Primary Colors.— See Colors.

Pure Color. — ^A color produced by homogeneous hght. Any
very brilliant or decided color.

Purple. — ^A color formed by the mixture of blue and red, includ-
ing the violet of the spectrum above wave length 0.417, which
is nearly a violet blue, and extending to, but not including,
crimson.

Bauvbow. — A bow or an arc of a circle, consisting of the pris-
matic colors, formed by the refraction and the reflection of
rays of light from drops of rain or vapor, appearing in the
part of the heavens opposite to the sun.

Red. — ^A color more or less resembling that of blood, or the lower
end of the spectrum. Red is one of the most general color
names, and embraces colors ranging in hue from aniline to
scarlet iodide of mercury and red lead. A red yellower than
vermilion is called scarlet. One much more crimson is called
crimson red. A very dark red, if pure or crimson, is called
maroon; if brownish, chestnut or chocolate. A pale red —
that is, one of low chroma and high luminosity — ^is called
a pink, ranging from rose pink or pale crimson to salmon
pink or pale scarlet.

Venetian Red. — ^An important pigment used by artists, some-
what darker than brick red in color, and very permanent.

Retina. — ^The innermost and chiefly nervous coat of the pos-
terior part of the eyeball.

Saturation, op Colors. — ^In optics the degree of admixture
with white, the saturation diminishing as the amount of
white is increased. In other words, the highest degree of
saturation belongs to a given color when in the state of great-
est purity.

Scale. — ^A graded system, by reference to which the degree,
intensity, or quality of a sense perception may be estimated.

Shade. — Degree or gradation of defective luminosity in a color,
often used vaguely from the fact that paleness, or high
luminosity, combined with defective CHROBiA, is con-
founded with high luminosity by itself. See Color, Hue,
and Tint.

Micron.— The raillioDth part of a metre, or ^^^PS ^^ ^ ^
inch. The term has been formally adopted by tb^ ^
national Commission of Weights and Measures* rept<^ ^
the civilized nations of the world, and is adopted by

trologists. -gthe^y'

Orange. — A reddish yellow color, of which the orange i
Vision, Persistence of. — The contmuance of a vxsuai

upon the retina of the eye after the exciting eaiise . i^^ ,
The length of Urae varies with the intensity <^^ ^ KoU^^
the excitability of the retina ^ and ordinarily isD^ie ' -^^
duration may be for hours, or even days- ^L ne ^

may be either positive or negative, the lattei" wUe ^
part appears dark and the colored parts in theiT e ^^^ ,
contrast colors. It is because of this pei'Sisten ^^ ^^ ,
example, a firebrand moved very rapidly ^-t*P^
or circle of light, 'tite^^^'

Photometer. — An instrument used to measure ^ A{x^ *'

light. Specifically, to compare the relati^?'^ '"^^
light emitted from various sources. ^ * ^ pst-U^^*^^

PlGBiENT. — Any substance that is or can be ^li^^

impart color to bodies. - osVtJ* *^

Pink. — ^A red color of low chroma, but hig-i^ X^^^

toward purple.
Primary CoLORS.^ee Colors. «^^^^HL

Pure Color. — ^A color produced by hom^*^^ ^^^^BL.

very brilliant or decided color.
Purple. — A color formed by the mixture of ^^
ing the violet of the spectrum above w-^
is nearly a violet blue, and extend"'
crimson. X

aid so reflecting to the eye, all
' iimbined in the same proportion

'I Till of light, of wave length 0.581
-fricted to highly chromatic and
*lnced in chrgbia, it becomes buff;
n , a cool brown. See Brown,
i rnnsisting of hydrated chromium
hjish green of great permanency.

Spectrum. — ^In physics the continuous band of light showing the
successive prismatic colors, or the isolated lines or bands of
color, observed when the radiation from such a source as the
sun or an ignited vapor in a gas flame is viewed after having
been passed through a prism (prismatic spectrum) or reflected
from a diffraction grating (diffraction or interference spectrum) .
See Rainbow.

Tint. — ^A variety of a color; especially and properly, a luminous
variety of low chroma; also, abstractly, the respect in which
a color may be raised by more or less admixture of white,
which at once increases the luminosity and diminishes the

CHROBfA.

Tone. — ^The prevailing effect of a color.

Ultramarine. — ^A beautiful natural blue pigment, obtained from
the mineral lapis-lazuli.

VALUE. — In painting and the allied arts, relation of one object,
part) or atmospheric plane of a picture to the others, with ref-
erence to light and shade, the idea of HUE being abstracted.

Vermilion. — ^The red sulphate of mercury.

Violet. — ^A general class of colors, of which the violet flower is a
highly chromatic example. The sensation is produced by a
pure blue whose chroma has been diminished while its
LUMINOSITY has been increased. Thus blue and violet are
the same color, though the sensations are different. A mere
increase of illumination may cause a violet-blue to appear
violet, with a diminution of apparent CHROifA. This color,
called violet or blue according to the quality of the sensation
it excites, is one of the three fundamental colors of Young's
theory. A deep blue tinged with red.

ViRiDiAN. — Same as Veronese green.

White. — ^A color transmitting, and so reflecting to the eye, all

the rays of the spectrum, combined in the same proportion

as in the impinging light.
Yellow. — ^The color of gold and of light, of wave length 0.581

micron. The name is restricted to highly chromatic and

luminous colors. When reduced in chrgbia, it becomes buff;

when reduced in LUMiNOsmr, a cool brown. See Brown.
Veronese Green. — ^A pigment consisting of hydrated chromium

sesquioxide. It is a clear bluish green of great permanency.

Also called Viridian.

A COLOR SYSTEM

WITH

COURSE OF STUDY

BASED ON THE COLOR SOUD AND ITS CHARTS.

See Chapter Il.t paragraphs 48, 49, arid 60.

Copyrifirht, 1904, by A. H. Miinsell.

A COLOR SYSTEM AND COURSE OF STUDY

BASED ON THE COLOR SOI.ID AND ITS CHARTS,
ADAPTED TO NINE YEARS OF SCHOOL. LIFE.

Grade.

Subject.

Colors Studied.

Illustration.

Materials.

Hum
of color.

Red. R.
Yellow. Y.
Green. G.
Blue. B.
Purple. P.

Soufirht in
Nature
and Art.

Borders

and
Rosettes.

Colored
crayons

and
papers.

Hues
of color.

Yellow-red. VR.
Green-yellow. GY.

Purple-blue. PB!
Red-purpie. RP.

Sought in
Nature
and Art.

Borders

and
Rosettes.

Colored
crayons

and
papers.

Values
of color.

Lie[ht, middle, and dark. R.

4* •« M tt p

Sought in
Nature
and Art.

Design.

Small
sphere.

Values
of color.

6 values of YR. ^

Sought in
Nature
and Art.

Design.

Charts.

Ghbomas
of color.

8 chromas of R^.
tt ♦» »t Y*

tt 4( tt ^Jl*

tt tt tt pc*

Sought in
Nature
and Art.

Design.

Charts.

Chkomas
of color.

3 chromas of YR*.

t. pga
RP«.

tt tt tt pi t. pi J

Sought in
Nature
and Art.

Design.

Large
sphere.

To OBSBBYE

imitate color by hue, value, and chboma. Paints.

&WBITB

Quantity of color.
Pairs of e<mal area and unequal area Paints.
Balanced by hue, value, and chbobia.

Quantity of color.

Triads of equal area and unequal area Pamts.
Balanced Dy hub, valub, and chboma.

Copyright, 1004, by A. H. MunseU.

STUDY OF SINGLE HUES AND THEIR SEQUENCE. Two Ybabs.

FIRST GRADE LESSONS.

1. Talk about familiar objects, to bring out color names, as t03rB, flowers,

2. clothing, birds, insects, etc.

3. Show soap bubbles and prismatic spectrum.

4. Teach term hub. Hues of flowers, spectrum, plumage of birds, etc.

5. Show uiDJ>ix* RBD. Find other reds.

6. " TXLLOW. " yellows, and compare with reds.

7. " OBKBN. *' greens, ** ** and yellows.

8. ** BLUB. *' blues, ** preceding hues.

9. " PURPLB. ** purples, " **
lQ-15. Review fiyb mtddlb hubs,* match with colored papers, and place in circle.
16-20. Show COLOR SPHBRB. Find sequence of five middle hues. Memorise order.

21. Middle red imitated with crayon, named and written by initial R.

26-30. Review, using middle hues* in borders and rosettes for deagn.

Aim. — ^To recognize sequence of five middle hues. To name, match, imi-
tate, write, and arrange them. .

SECOND GRADE LESSONS.
1-3. Review sequence of five middle hues.*

4. Show a hue intbrmbdiatb between red and yellow. Find it in objects.

5. C!ompare with red and yellow.

6. Recognize and name tbllow-rbd. Match, imitate, and write YR.

7S. Show GRBBN-TBLLOW between green and yellow. Treat as above, and write GY.
0-10. ** BLUE-GRBEN ** bluc and green. " " ** BG.

11-12. " PURPLE-BLUB " purplc and blue. '* " ** PB.

13-14. ** RBD-PURPLB ** red and purple. " ** " RP.

15-20. Make circle of ten hues. Place Intermediates, and memorise order so as to repeat

forward or backward. Match, imitate, and write by initials.
21-25. Find sequence of ten hues on color sphere. Compare with hues of natural objects.
26-30. Review, using any two hues in sequence for borders and rosettes.

Aim. — To recognize sequence of ten hues, made up of five middle* hues
and the five intermediates. To name, match, write, imitate, and
arrange them.

* The term middle, as used in this course of color study, is understood to mean only
the five principal hues which stand midway in the scales of value and chroma. Strictly
speaking, their five intermediates are also midway of the scales; but they are obtained by
nuxture of the five principal hues, as shown in their names, and are of secondary impor-
tance.

STUDY OF SINGLE VALUES AND THEIR SEQUENCE. Two Ybabs.

THIRD GRADE LB8SON3.

1. Review seqiienoe of ten hues.

2. Recognise, name, match, imitate, write, and find them on the

3. OOLOB SPHBBK. Also in objects.

4. Teaoh use of term taItUS. C!olor value recognised apart from color hue.

5. Find values of red, lighter and darker than the

6. middle value already familiar.

7. Tbbmm VAifUHBof BED. Find on sphere. Name as uqrt, ioddlb, and dabk

values of red.

8. ** Imitate with crayons, and write them as 1, 5, and 9.

9. ** TELLOW. Ck>mpare with above.

10. Recognise, name, match, and imitate with crayons.

11. ** GBBEN. Compare, and treat as above.

12. Find on sphere and in objects.

17-20. Review, combining two values and a single hue for design.*

Aim. — To recognize a sequence combining three values and five middle
hues. To name, match, imitate, and arrange them.

FOURTH GRADE LESSONS.

1. Review sequence of three values in each of the five middle hues.

2. To recognise, name, match, imitate, and

3. find them on sphere and in objects.

4. Show ITVB VAL17B8 of BBD. Find them on large color sphere. Number them

5. 1,3, 5, 7, 9. Match, imitate, and write.

6. ** BLUB-OBEBN, ** " " "

7. " PURPLB BLUB compared with Yellow.^ -,__ . ,

A «« n r-t \ ireat as atx>ve

8. BED-puRPiA Green. I ,

9. " TBLLOW-BED ** BlUC. [ ^

in «« «« -n. 1 I review.

10. OBBBN-TBLLOW Purplc.^

Aim. — To recognize sequences combining five values in each of ten hues.
To name, match, imitate, wbitb, and arrange them.

* These ten lessons in this and succeeding grades are devoted to color perception only.
Their application to design is apart of the general course in drawing, and will be so consid-
ered in the succeeding grades. Note that, although thus far nothing has been said about
complementary hues, the child has been led to associate them in opposite pairs by the color
sphere. (See Chapter III., p. 27.)

STUDY OF SINGLE CHROWLAS AND THEIR SEQUENCES- TwoYeaks*

FIFTH GRADE LESSONS.

1. Review sequenoes of hue and value. Find them on the oolor sphere. Name, mateh,

imitate, write, and arrange them by hue and value.

2. Teaoh uae of term ghboma. Compare three chromas with three values of red^

Name them weak, middlb. and btbonq chromas.
Find in nature and art.

3. Thrbb chbomas of bbd. Compare with three of blue-green.

4. Show ooLOB TREE. Suggest unequal ehroma of hoee.

5. *' TXLLOW. Compare with three chromas of purple-blue*

0. " ORBEN. " ** red-purple.

7. ** BLUB. •• " yellow-red.

8. ** PURPLE. ** ** green-yellow.

9. Arrange five middle hues in circle, described as on the surface of the

Color Sphere (middle chroma), with weaker chromas inside, and
stronger chromas outside, the sphere.
10. Review, — to find these sequences of chroma in nature and art.

Aim, — To recognize sequences combining three chromas, middle value,
and ten hues. To name, match, imitate, and arrange them.

SIXTH GRADE LESSONS.

1. Review sequences combining three chromas, five hues, and middle value.

Find on Color Tree, name, match, imitate and arrange them.

2. Thrbb chromab of lighter and darker rbd. Compare with middle red.

8. Write '* '* *' ** as a fraction, chroma under value*

using 1, 6, and 9. Thus R{

4. find ** ** red, and compare with darker blue-green.

5. Three ghrom as of lzqhtbr and darkbr tbllow, with purple-blue,
fi. " *• " " GREEN, *• red-purple.

7. •* ** " ** BLUB, ** yellow-red.

8. •* ** ** ** PURPLE, " green-yellow.

9. Colon in nature and art, defined by hue, value, and chroma. Named, matched, in^

tated, written, and arranged by Color Sphere and Tree.
10. Review, — to find sequences combining three chromas, five values, and ten hues.

Aim. — To recognize sequences of chroma, as separate from sequences of
hue Of sequences of value. ,To name, match, write, imitate, and
arrange colors in terms of their hue, value, and chroma.

;COLOR EXPRESSION IN TERMS OF THE HUES, VALUES,
AND CHROMAS.

SEVENTH GRADE LBSSONS.]
■ 1. Review seqaenoeB of hue (initial), value (upper numeral), & ehroma (lower numeral).

3. EzeriBises in expressing colors of natural objeots by the notation, and

4. traoing their relation by the spherioal solid.

5. Reds in Nature and Art, imitated, written, and traced **

6. YuixowB

7. Grbkns

8. Blum

9. PURPUM

10. Onb oolob pais selected, defined, and arranged for design. (See note 4th Grade.)

Aim. — To define any color by its hue, value, and chroma. To imitate
with pigments and write it.

EIGHTH GRADE 'LESSONS.

1. Review sequences, and select colors which balance. Illustrate the term.

2. Balancb of light and dark, — weak and strong, — hot and cold colors.

3. Rbd and blue-green balanced in hue, value, and chroma, with bquai* abbas.

4. Ybllow •* purple-blue ** "

5. Grebn . " red-purple ** **

0. Blub ** yellow-red "

7. PuRPLB " green-yellow ** "

8. Unbqual abbab of the above pairs, balanced by compensating qualities of hue

9. value, and chroma. Examples from nature and art.
10. Onb oolob paib of unequal areas selected, defined, and used in design.

Aim. — To BALANCE colors by area, hue, value, and chroma. To imitate
with pigments and write the balance by the notation.

NINTH GRADE LESSONS.

1. Review balance of color pairs, by area, hue, value, and chroma.

2. To recognise, name, imitate, write, and record them*
8. SsLBcnoN of two colors to balance a given bbd.

4. " " " " TBLLOW.

fi. " " " " BLUB.
7. " " " " PURPLB.

8-10. Tbiad of color, selected, balanced, written, and used in dengn.

Aim. — To recognize triple balance of color, and express it in terms of area,
hue, value, and chroma. Also to use it in design.

INDEX BY PARAGRAPHS.

Balance of color. 23, 47, 67, 75. 77, 81-86,
Black, 12, 16, 22, 31. 41, 64. 65. 65, 91, 119.
Charts of the color sphere. 14. 17, 126. 127.

Chroma, 3, 4. 8, 11. 14, 21-24, 28, 39. 40,
Strongest, 32, 34. 42.
Chromatic tuning fork, 117, 118, 119-127.
Circuit, inclined, 16, 17, 97.
Color, apparatus. 3, 8, 14, 132.
Atlas, 129.

Balance, 23, 47, 67, 75-77, 81-86 (triple),
Blindness, 182, 183.
Complementary, 76, 77.
Color, dimensions of, 3 8, 9, 13, 25, 63,

Curves. 94.

Hand as a holder of, 54-58.
Language, poverty of, 5, 175.
Measured, 3, 14, 32.
Meridians, 136, 137.
Mixture, 56-72.

PHncipinl (5), 4. 16, 21, 26. 31, 34, 40.

Frinoipal (5) and intermediates (5), 31,

Kecordu, 145.

Bbytbrn, 166.

Bequencen, 47, 73, 79, 120, 166, 169-171,

Sir Isaac Nffwton'n, 80,

Standard, 4, 26, 35.

Tones, 134.
Coloristic art, 7, 38. 45, 177.
Combined scales, 12, 14, 36, 37, 47.
Complements, 76, 77.
Course of color study, 48-50.
Daylight photometer, 22, 103, 119
Fading, 8, 23.
Flat diagrams, 14.
Fundamental sensations, 28.
Green, 2, 32, 104, 136, 137, 140, 147, 148.
Hue, 3, 4, 8. 9-11, 14, 18, 21-26, 34, 39, 40

Ideal color system. 100.
Lambert's pyramid, note to 31.
Luminist, 121.
Measurement of colors, 3, 8, 14, 116.
Middle gray, 61, 65, 72.
Mixture of hues, 56-72.
Musical terms used for color, 6, 46, 148-

Neutral gray, 11, 23, 25, 62, 64, 65, 72, 114,

Notation diagram, 140.
Personal bias, 144, 174.
Primary sensations, 89.
Prismatic color sphere, 98.
Purple, 5.
Rainbow, 15, 17.
Red, middle. 1, 32, 41, 60, 66,72, 104, 110,

Retina, 21.
RCinge, note to 31.
Shades and tints, 22.
Spectrum, solar, 15-18, 27, 28. 87, 88, 92,

Tone, 6.
Value, 3, 8-11. 14. 21-24. 28. 34. 39. 40-

Scale of, 12, 19, 25, 31, 34, 35, 64, 102,

Vermilion, 42.
Vertical (neutral) axis, 12, 25, 31, 34, 66,

Warm and cold colors, 72, 123, note to 136,

^ c^TVlUNSELL PHOTOMETER

Patented November 19, 190 1

A portable, daylight instrument, adapted to laboratory work
in general, and of especial service in the comparison
of color values. Placed in the course of
Optical Measurements at the Mas-
sachusetts Institute of
Technology

IN PREPARATION

Ol COLOR cATLAS

Also text-books and models specially designed to serve in
the education of the color sense

! NOIMO .MS
A oowf notaMon,
