DRAWING and PAINTING
SELF-TAUGHT

BY

ANSON K. GROSS

INSTRUCTOR

SCHOOL OF THE MUSEUM OF FINE ARTS, BOSTON

AUTHOR OF TEXT-BOOKS ON ART

AND THE

DRAWING AND PAINTING GLASS

w.™ GRADED LESSONS «v

EVELYN F. CROSS

SUPERVISOR CF ART, STONEHAM,
MASSACHUSETTS

A. K. CROSS

WINTHROP 52, MASS.

Copyrighted by

ANSON K. CROSS and EVELYN F. CROSS

PRESS OF GEO. H. ELLIS CO. (INC.) BOSTON

IN MEMORIAM.

I inscribe these pages to the memory of Professor Walter
Smith, the founder of the Massachusetts Normal Art School
and its director during the first two years of my studentship.

After several foreign expositions had shown that a manufac-
turing state must encourage art education if its industries are to
succeed, the Commonwealth of Massachusetts and the City of
Boston extended a joint invitation to Professor Smith to take
charge of Art Education in the State and in Boston. This he did

Professor Smith was recommended by English Art Educators
as the best man for the work, and the success of the Normal Art
School is due to the splendid influence and unusual ability of
Professor Smith, who fought for all that was sane, honest, and
true in art and art education.

This nation is greatly indebted to Professor Smith for the
splendid accomplishments of those who were students under
him, and the many more who profited by his influence after he
had left the school in charge of those who maintained the high
standards which he had established.

As Director of Art for Boston he prepared graded lessons for
his teachers. These were desired for general use, and thus the
"Walter Smith Drawing Books" were published. As a boy I
used these books, and when a drawing was to be copied I followed
the printed directions and made my copy either a little larger or
a little smaller than the original.

When, a few years later, a revision of the books was desired
an unfortunate controversy arose the circumstances of which
have been given me by many who were familiar with them at
the time, as I now relate them.

After Professor Smith had approved each page of the new
edition, changes were made without his knowledge, and when
the books were printed a series of dots appeared in each of the
spaces formerly left blank for the drawing to be enlarged or re-
duced by eye. Professor Smith asked to have these dots taken
out, and this being refused he said his name must not appear on
the books and he could not use them in the Boston Schools. He
was informed that if he did not, he would probably lose his posi-
tion. In spite of what he may have regarded as an implied threat,
he insisted that the books be printed without the dots or that

iv DRAWING AND PAINTING SELF-TAUGHT

his name be taken off the books, although this no doubt meant
the loss of a fortune in royalties. Not being able to take out the
dots he refused to use the books in Boston, although this involved
the hurried preparation of substitute lessons.

When Professor Smith resigned life positions in England, he
was told his Massachusetts positions would be as permanent,
but at a meeting of the School Committee which came shortly
afterwards he was not reelected. Soon after this he lost the
State positions and went back to England to take charge of the
English Technical College in Bradford, Yorkshire. Four years
later he died at the age of only fifty.

It seems so incredible that an expert unusually inspiring and
successful as director, teacher, author and lecturer could have
been unjustly treated that I wish to call attention to four Govern-
ment reports upon "Art and Industry" by Colonel Isaac E.
Clarke in which many pages are devoted to commendation of
Walter Smith and his work in America. The following is quoted
from this report. Part II, xlvii.

" In the widely scattered homes of this broad land the young
men and the young women who rejoiced to sit at his feet and who
caught the inspiration of his enthusiasm will long cherish his
memory and mourn his loss; while those who recognized the
uncommon genius of the man and who realize that he could leave
no single successor who would be considered as of equal authority,
can never cease to regret that his career in America should have
been for any reason so prematurely and infelicitously ended."

"It is gratifying to know that although absent for thirteen
years, he was so esteemed in his native country as to be eagerly
welcomed on his return and at once given an honorable and
lucrative position. . . . There is however little satisfaction to
those who realize what Walter Smith had already effected here.
. . . This English provincial college gains a great teacher but
America loses an unrivalled educational leader." From Part I,

PREFACE.

Thirty years ago I made my first efforts to cause instruction in
drawing to become vision training in place of picture making
in the production of which the student's hands and teacher's
eyes and knowledge were combined. I have endeavored to ac-
complish this result by having the student substitute many
quick sketches, each self-corrected for one or more long pieces
of work of finished but superficial result.

In 1895 I published the book Free-hand Drawing and explained
that I made use of clear window glass simply as a drawing tablet
to be used in place of paper; that the drawing was made upon
it entirely free-hand when a sheet of white cardboard was placed
behind the glass; that all tests and the usual measurements were
forbidden until the drawing became as perfect as possible by
eye alone; that when complete the drawing was tested for the
first time by removing the card and looking through the glass
to see if the drawing would appear to cover the object. I care-
fully explained that the Glass was not for tracing or for correct-
ing work on paper, and that it was soon discarded because its
proper use resulted in eyes that were truer than the results of
tracing or other use of the Glass as an aid to results on paper.

In spite of these assertions which have been repeated on every
possible occasion since the method was published, the Glass is
still supposed to be a device for tracing, first upon the Glass, and
then from the Glass to paper, as explained by Leonardo da Vinci.

When my first book was written the Glass was without the
spirit-level, which experience proved necessary if students were
ever to see angles truly. Only in recent years has the Glass been
perfected by the addition of two lenses, which enable students
to discover mistakes in light and shade and color as surely as
the spirit-level enables them to find mistakes in perspective
outline.

New methods of using the Glass with young pupils have re-
cently been tried, and have proven that it is possible for fourth
grade children to draw from nature with class results that equal
those in other subjects.

New methods of using the Glass in Art Schools for the train-
ing of the memory and for the study of free-hand perspective
have been tried and perfected.

These methods enable all the students to understand with

vi DRAWING AND PAINTING SELF-TAUGHT

little aid from the teacher, whereas formerly with all possible
assistance, only the talented were able both to explain and prac-
tically use the essential theories.

Therefore this book is undertaken to explain these new methods
as well as emphasize again the folly of tracing and the usual
tests that substitute measurements for true eyes. Such methods
are crutches that enable one to hobble at the start and insure
the continuance of this crippled condition as long as tests and
measures are depended upon more than the vision.

The methods of this book are not based on tracing or any
system of measuring or testing to be used permanently. Their
sole aim is to discard all measures and tests as far as possible
from the start. Even pencil measurements are forbidden with
the rest, until the student has done his very best by depending
upon his eyes alone. Then only is the first test permitted, and
it is so simple that a child can apply it perfectly and be his own
teacher.

By this method the first drawings are made with a special,
soft crayon upon a sheet of clear window glass, a piece of white
cardboard being held behind the glass so that the drawing can
be seen upon the glass as readily as it would be upon paper.
The test is applied by removing this cardboard back and holding
up the glass to see if the lines of the drawing will appear to cover
the edges of the object studied. If they do this when the spirit-
level shows that the glass is held level, then the angles and pro-
portions of the sketch are correct. If the lines will not cover
those of the object, however, these mistakes are seen, and the
student thus instructs himself.

These methods do not render it easy for even the talented to
become artists, but they do enable object drawing to be studied
profitably by all Grammar School pupils who are able to do the
other required work.

These methods will enable any one to gain in his own home
the power to draw and paint truthfully from nature. When
this is understood and proven, High School graduates will be
expected to have this ability. In time this will mean a general
appreciation of art that has never before been known. This
will lead to the recognition of exceptional ability and the support
of artists who have it. It will not increase the number of poor
artists, for when all are able to master drawing as readily as writ-
ing or arithmetic, those of average ability will not study art as a
profession. They often do this now because average power to
draw is falsely considered proof of genius. One who can write
only a descriptive letter has as much chance of becoming a
famous poet as a student of art has of becoming a famous

PREFACE vii

artist when his only power is that of drawing truthfully from
nature.

These methods will not enable the student or the teacher to
avoid the hard work that must always underlie real success.
Copying and dictation and most other subjects give results to
exhibit more quickly than honest use of the Glass. Teachers
who try to give visual power, will find that the Glass does away
with the strain involved in correcting drawings, and enables
the class to make many more drawings and correct them all
with very little assistance.

Drawing teachers are now the most overworked of all teachers,
and the failure of drawing in the elementary schools is not due
to lack of effort or ability on their part. I have no word of criti-
cism for the drawing teacher, who far too often is an artist by
nature and training, and yet not free to teach as he wishes, be-
cause of influences that confine and restrict art instruction in
public and elementary schools to a greater degree than other
subjects.

The possibilities of this method can not be known until students
who have used the Glass all through the Grammar School grad-
uate from the High School. Such students should do work far
better than any produced thus far through only a partial use
of the Glass.

This book is to supplement my earlier books and not to take
the place of any of them. It is not a complete Text-book for
art students' use, but it aims to give a quick and sure method
whereby the student may gain by self-instruction true vision for
outline, values, and color.

The chapter on Perspective is not a full presentation of the
subject, for the scientific method is not explained at all, and only
the few problems most necessary to the artist are presented in
the new way developed from the use of the Glass in the study
-of object drawing from memory and from observation.

The chapter on Graded Lessons does not pretend to be a com-
plete course for the public schools, but only a practical method
for teaching object drawing in the grades. Many excellent
books supply all needed aid in design and other subjects that
should be included in a public school course.

The purposes of this book are : First, to make it possible for
any person to gain power to draw and paint from nature by
home study; Second, to present a method for use in the public
schools that shall make object drawing as generally possible as
other studies; Third, to make an effort to harmonize the con-
flicting views of those teachers who consider drawing from the
opposing standpoints of art and science and who thus make it

Vlll DRAWING AND PAINTING SELF-TAUGHT

so artistic that there is no foundation of science to support free
expression, or on the other hand make it so literal that there
is little chance for free and artistic expression. I shall in this last
effort try to show that science and art must be inseparable in the
practice of the artist and should have equal attention in the
schools.

I have not reproduced my students' drawings on account of
their excellence but because they are the unaided efforts of be-
ginners. When they are compared with the crude sketches
made on entering the gain is apparent though defects are still
evident. These mistakes were pointed out but corrections were
not permitted, since this would have caused reliance on the
instructor more than on self-criticism.

It is impossible fully to show the actual gain since the process
will not reproduce the quick sketches that are most conclusive.
Figures 4 and 5 show best the value of the method, for these
prize drawings were made by students whose average age was
twenty-one and who had spent about three years in the Massa-
chusetts Normal Art School, where only a small part of the
time is given to figure drawing. These prizes were competed
for by students of the best art schools in the country in which it
is the custom to spend six or eight years in study of the figure alone.

When the Faculty of the Art Museum School secured my
appointment as instructor of still life it gave me my first oppor-
tunity to teach drawing, values, and color at the same time,
for in the Normal Art School, I was restricted to outline. A few
months' experience with the serious students of the Museum
makes me confident that as much time can be saved in the study
of painting by the use of the Painting Glass as is saved in the
study of drawing by the use of the Drawing Glass. As the
Painting Glass was not used by the students in the Normal Art
School the only illustration that is positive proof of its influence
is the Frontispiece.

This book is very different from my first ones, and it is dif-
ferent from what I would have written five years ago. In the
next five years I may wish to change this book, but I offer it as
the result of my experience up to this time, in the hope that it
may aid others to make truthful nature study the foundation
for art expression.

The reproductions of pencil drawings by Miss Anna M. Hath-
away combine truth, beauty, and good technique in a way
helpful for students to study. Miss Hathaway was first a student
and has been for many years a teacher in the Normal Art School.
Her drawings show what it is possible for a talented student to
do as a result of the broad training recommended.

PREFACE

IX

I am indebted to my sister, Miss Evelyn F. Cross, for the
demonstration that has enabled grade teachers, who have never
made a special study of drawing, to use the Glass with such suc-
cess that the object drawing has been a pleasure to themselves
and their pupils when formerly all had disliked this subject.

I am also indebted to Mr. Arthur B. Webber, Superintendent
of schools at Stoneham, Mass.,— who permitted the experiments
with the Glass at a time when object drawing has not been the
fashion in Grammar Grades. Without this assistance the first
experiments, that failed, would have been the last.

I am indebted to the Suffolk Engraving Co. for unusual in-
terest and care in the reproduction of difficult subjects.

From photograph of the pitcher and background from which the Frontispiece

was drawn. The apple was not the same, but the light and shade and color

values are nearly true in this photograph, and prove how much the student

gained in the first lesson.

CONTENTS.

PAGE

Preface v

CHAPTER I.
Vision Truer than Tests . 1

CHAPTER II.
Drawing Self-taught 10

CHAPTER III.
Painting Self-taught 40

CHAPTER IV.
Memory Drawing 74

CHAPTER V.
Perspective Theory 83

CHAPTER VI.
Drawing No More Difficult than Other Subjects 104

CHAPTER VII.
Drawing in the Public Schools . 117

CHAPTER VIII.
Model Drawing in the Grades . 130

CHAPTER IX.
Lessons for Graded Schools . 142

CHAPTER X.
Advice to the Art Student 167

CHAPTER XI.
The Failure of Education 176

CHAPTER XII.
State Laws on Drawing 186

Report of New York College Entrance Examiners 187

Madame Cave's Method 191

Education for the Talented ' 193

List of Reference Books 199

Letters from Painters, Sculptors, Educators 202

DRAWING AND PAINTING SELF-TAUGHT

Chapter I.
VISION TRUER THAN TESTS.

1. Ruskin said, "The excellence of an artist as such depends
wholly on refinement of perception and that it is this mainly
which a master or a school can teach. . . . One task, however,
of some difficulty, the student will find I have not imposed upon
him; namely learning the laws of perspective. For perspective
is not of the slightest use, except in rudimentary work. . . . No
great painters ever trouble themselves about perspective and very
few of them know its laws; they draw everything by the eye,
and, naturally enough, disdain in the easy part of their work
rules which can not help them in difficult ones."*

2. Artists and Educators Differ. — Though the above state-
ment harmonizes with the practice of the masters, past and pres-
ent, it has not influenced the educators who are apt to pity the
artist for his ignorance, and assure students how much better
the artists would paint if they would understand theory.

The artist's influence is confined to his students. The educa-
tor's influence extends far more widely through art schools,
normal schools, universities, summer schools, public schools and
especially through text-books and publishing firms. Thus
elementary art study is far too often based on rules, theories,
tests and measures instead of on vision, and it places special
emphasis on technique instead of on true representation.

3. Trust Your Eyes. — I was taught to trust measurements
more than my eyes, and therefore I explained in my first books
the best way to measure. Several years after these books were
written my pupils proved to me that they could see more exactly
than they could measure even when they followed my directions
for measuring, and then I began to forbid the pencil measure-
ments that prevented reliance upon more truthful eyes.

Any teacher may prove that the average pupil can see closer
than he can measure by placing his measured drawing far enough
away to have it look the same size as the object and then asking

* Preface to "Elements of Drawing."

2 DRAWING AND PAINTING SELF-TAUGHT

him to forget his measures and decide by eye alone whether the
drawing is stouter or slimmer than the object. Even before the

i

Fig. 1.— From sketch by Rembrandt (1607-1669).

eyes have been trained to draw without measures, 90% of the
replies will improve incorrect drawings.

4. To see truly you must look quickly from the object to
the drawing, and transfer the vision back and forth from one to
the other as rapidly as possible, trying to forget that one image
is from the drawing and the other from the object. This quick
comparison will suddenly enable you to see appearances on the
plane of the drawing, and thus realize your mistakes, and the
folly of depending upon measures that can never equal your
eyes.

5. Tests applied before you draw or to aid results on paper
are harmful if relied on more than vision, for the proper use of
tests is to train you to see mistakes after your eyes have done
their best without the tests. The beginner who must measure
in order to continue drawing is as foolish to spend weeks or

VISION TRUER THAN TESTS 3

months on one drawing as the pianist would be who tried to
master Beethoven without spending any time on finger exercises.

Fig. 2. — From oil monochrome.

6. Use the Glass properly and it will show you mistakes
more surely in your first lesson than could the best artist. There-
fore, in order to improve, there is no need for you to finish your
first sketches. Never try to finish any drawing more difficult
than an outline from a copy until you have made so many hun-
dred sketches from nature that you begin to see truly.

7. Draw Bulk Instead of Outlines. — The secret of success as
draftsman, sculptor, or painter lies in thinking of and represent-
ing from the start the diameter or bulk of an object and each of
its parts. As long as you look at and draw lines, or edges, you

4 DRAWING AND PAINTING SELF-TAUGHT

will fail to represent the bulk correctly. You will never draw
well till you stop thinking of lines and edges and continually ask
yourself as you draw if your sketch is fatter or slimmer than the
model.

8. Fig. 1 reproduced from a sketch by Rembrandt shows
how the masters begin to express mass and action by the fewest
possible lines. You should study such sketches often until you
can think of and work for mass, and are not afraid of getting an
extra line. Study of this sketch will bring out horses and men
where at first no form is evident.

9. Drawing Should Look as Large as the Model. — The
drawing problem is much simplified by placing the drawing in
such a position and at such a distance from the eye that it may
appear the same size as the object and on the same level. A life
size drawing should be placed at the right or left of the object and
the same distance away from the eye and the drawing made by
memory of observations repeated as often as desired from the
chosen position. A smaller drawing should be placed enough
nearer the eye to appear full size from the chosen position. To
sit or stand and draw from any position upon an easel that you
can reach without walking up to it, involves making a small
drawing unless the drawing is to look much larger than the model
while you work upon it. Unless the drawing looks the same size
as the subject it is much harder to see its mistakes. Therefore
art school students are often almost forced to measure because
they can not choose their positions and the size of the drawing
so as to use their eyes. This is one reason why they progress so
slowly that only a few of the most talented ones can depend upon
their eyes when they finish their art school courses.

10. To draw the size the object appears simplifies the com-
parison of the drawing with the model for it reduces this com-
parison to one plane (that of the picture) by making it possible
for you to forget that the object is solid and behind the draw-
ing and think of it as if it were a second drawing on the same
plane as your own drawing. In thus comparing, however, you
should think first of bulk and diameter and never of the details
in the contour until you are sure you have the weight and action
correct.

11. Limit the Time on One Drawing. — Time spent on draw-
ings that are not corrected is wasted, and so by usual methods
the class must finish every sketch in order that the teacher may
criticise each drawing. The Glass enables every student to crit-
icise sketches made in even a minute or two, therefore it is wise
to limit the time that may be spent on one drawing. First-year
students should seldom spend more than one day on one draw-

i

TO

c3
PI

I
i

< i

6 DRAWING AND PAINTING SELF-TAUGHT

ing, and this only at the end of the year. Second-year students
will be wise not to spend more than two days on one draw-
ing. The more advanced the student the longer the time
that may be well spent on one drawing; most advanced art school
students may spend a week or two on one drawing or painting.

Fig. 2 is from an art school drawing made in 1882 by a student
nineteen years old who had been in the School one year when
the work was completed. The drawing is a monochrome in
oil-color and several weeks were spent upon it. The time would
have been more wisely spent in many quick sketches with pos-
sibly one carefully finished study representing a small part of
the cast.

12. Think the Tests.— After a few months of faithful study
upon the Glass, your eyes will become so true that when you
apply the tests to a sketch on paper, they will show no errors.
Then you will begin to omit the tests because you have learned
to apply them visually from the very start of your sketch, and
more exactly than is possible when you must depend on the
spirit-level and thread.

13. This true vision will not insure success as an artist, or
the speedy realization of your full power, for this is impossible
to youth. No artist who is honest will cease to improve as long
as he retains vigor of mind and body, and the chief object of
this book is to aid the student to a true vision and vital expres-
sion of appearances in less time than is needed by usual methods.

14. Do Not Trace. — The Glass may be used to trace results
to paper, but if in earnest you will not do this, or hasten to pro-
duce anything to exhibit. If you do not understand that the
correct drawing is one which will appear to cover the object
behind the Glass, it will do no harm to make a few tracings on
the Glass in order to make perspective clear, but you should
not transfer these tracings to paper, or make any attempt to
draw pictures on paper, until you see well enough to do the work
without aid from the Glass or the teacher.

15. The Artist Uses Tests. — When your student-days are
over you may use a pencil for a few measurements, or you may
use a finder with equal squares to measure proportions. You
may even use a photograph if you understand that it is as false
in values as it is in drawing and useful as a record of facts not
to be copied literally. But you will, if you are wise, never be
the slave of any method or science, for the artist has always been
in advance of the scientist and always will be, since science deals
with the material facts, and the artist, in the person of the in-
ventor and discoverer, has always been busy in overturning
accepted theories and replacing them with truer ones.

VISION TRUER THAN TESTS 7

16. The Artist is Inspired. — Art and invention are due to
the intelligence that refuses to accept the orthodox, or any au-
thority that can be disproved. The artist has known the truth
before the scientist, because he trusts his own inspiration more
than the theories of the Schools. The artist builds a steamer
to cross the Atlantic to bring back a book written by a scien-
tist to prove that no boat can be built to carry coal enough to
steam across the ocean. The artist discovers the X-ray which
scraps all text-books on science; and he builds an aeroplane
to show the absurdity of the text-books that state the impossi-
bility of building a flying machine heavier than the air.

17. Text-Books False. — Text-books to this date have been
records of the ever changing imperfect theories of their periods,
and the future may prove many present theories as false as those
we have outgrown. Do not believe the inventions are all made
and nature's laws all stated, for the future will record more of
progress than the past, and honest students will gain the reward
for hard work for ages to come.

When the educator will admit the inspiration of the artist,
inventor, and poet, it may be possible for him to modify the
inartistic methods that now produce results whose "Superficial
pretence actually tended to degrade the taste and to blunt rather
than sharpen the observation of the pupils." See Section 266.

18. Practical knowledge can not be gained except from hard
work that combines theory and practice, therefore no change of
educational methods, or of social conditions or of laws, will ever
in fact make men free and equal as students or producers.

Some time in the future the artist, the scientist, and the edu-
cator will have more equal influence in our schools. Then
ignorance, hatred, bigotry, superstition and selfishness will grad-
ually be outgrown and a real civilization begin which will value
intellect more and wealth less, and will therefore offer equal
opportunity for education to all who are willing and able to pay
the price in work and study.

Prize Drawing, Academy of Fine Arts, Philadelphia.

Fig. 4. — First Prize of $200 in 1919 was awarded John H. Crossman, who entered
the Normal Art School in September, 1915, at age of 18. In May, 1918, he enlisted
in U. S. Coast Artillery. His first year of study included the use of the Drawing
Glass. This competition was open to all Art Schools in the country.

Prize Drawing, Academy of Fine Arts, Philadelphia.

Fig. 5. — This drawing won Third Prize of $100 in 1921. It is by Beatrice Dwan, who
entered the Normal Art School in 1918, at the age of 17.

First Prize of $200 was awarded to Ruth Deal in 1920. She entered the Normal Art
School in 1917, at age of 17. Her drawing was so injured it can not be reproduced.
Miss Deal and Miss Dwan used the Drawing Glass in their first year.

Chapter II.
DRAWING SELF-TAUGHT.

19. A Perspective Drawing. — An artist tries to create an im-
pression of nature's appearances. Usually he works upon a flat
surface. A perspective drawing is one upon a flat surface, which
will create in the eye an image exactly like that produced by
nature. In other words, if a sheet of glass is set up between the
eye and the object, and lines drawn upon it to exactly cover or
hide those of the model, when the eye is at one fixed point, the
model may.be taken away and the drawing on the Glass will
still cause in the eye the same linear image that the object pro-
duced. Leonardo da Vinci explained the method of making a
perspective drawing by tracing it on a sheet of glass, and since
this is the simplest method, it has continued in use to this day.

20. Perspective Distorts. — The science of perspective has
been understood for hundreds of years, and is as exact as any
other branch of geometry. It enables one to draw on paper the
exact lines which would be traced on a sheet of glass set up in a
given position with reference to the eye, and to an object whose
size and relation to the eye is known. Such a drawing will
create in the eye an image exactly like that caused by the object
it represents, as long as the drawing is viewed from the fixed
point from which the object is supposed to be seen. But if it is
looked at from any other distance or direction, the drawing will
not look like the object, and may often be as much distorted as
Fig. 6 which was photographed from nine perfect spheres.

21. The Photograph is a Perspective. — The common photo-
graph is a perspective, since it is the intersection of a plane by
lines that converge from the object toward one point. The
distortion of Fig. 6 which causes only one of the nine spheres to
be represented by a circle, illustrates the difference between
the photograph or any plane perspective and what the eye really
sees.

Only the small part of a photograph, or any perspective on a
plane, that is exactly opposite the eye, is exactly like what the
eye sees. This is fully illustrated in Chapter VII of "Free-hand
Drawing" by the author, and this chapter shows why depend-
ence upon any method of measuring departs from the vision
and the feeling of the artist, by producing the perspective

12 DRAWING AND PAINTING SELF-TAUGHT

distortion inevitable when any plane cuts the visual rays to the
outer parts of a picture obliquely.

Perspective distortions are not the only reasons for avoiding
scientific perspective and mechanical measurements, for those
who depend upon them do not train the vision, and never obtain
eyes that are trustworthy ; besides this, the measurements and
tests applied are often so inaccurate as to do more harm than
good.

22. Substitute Vision Training for Picture Making. — Glass
has been so long used for tracing and mechanical aid to results
on paper that those who hear of a new method of drawing on
glass are likely to conclude that it is another mechanical system
for the artist to oppose. Therefore it is hoped that those who
read this book at all, will read it long enough to discover that it
does not recommend glass for tracing, or as an aid to results
on paper, but for free-hand drawings made without measures to
train the eyes to see so closely that the use of the Glass and all
other tests finally become unnecessary.

This result is accomplished by using the Glass as a drawing
tablet in place of paper. The drawing is made upon it with a
specially designed crayon, all measurements and tests being for-
bidden, also all tracing, the student being required to make and
change the drawing by eye alone, until it seems perfect. Then,
and then only the student may apply the first test given, by hold-
ing the drawing up between the eye and the object to see if the
lines and proportions of the sketch will perfectly cover those of
the object. In this way children as young as seven years are able
to see their mistakes and realize that the Glass is not a mechanical
device to aid in making drawings on paper but that it gives a
scientific test of the accuracy of one's vision. It is the most
artistic of all methods, in absolutely forbidding all finished draw-
ings on paper until such time as they can be made without the
aid of the Glass or any other test.

23. The Drawing Glass. — This Glass consists of a sheet of
clear window glass set in a frame of wood and so held by screws
that it may be quickly replaced if broken. A white card slides
in grooves behind the Glass so that the drawing on the Glass may
be seen as readily as if made on paper. The drawing is made
with the "Cross" crayon and erased with a piece of dry cotton
flannel or outing cloth.

A spirit-level is inserted in the top edge of the frame to show
when the frame is level. This is not used when the sketch is in-
progress as the lines of the frame give the directions for the
horizontal and vertical lines of the sketch, and so when drawing
it is better not to look at the spirit-level even when the frame is

DRAWING SELF-TAUGHT

held so nearly upright that the level will indicate truly. It will
not do this when the frame is much inclined, and you should
never think of the level as you draw. The level is, however,
absolutely necessary when a drawing is to be tested, as without
its aid even the best students will incline the frame and fail to
find their mistakes in angles.

24. Do Not Foreshorten the Glass. — When drawing on the
Glass it should be held in the left hand as far as possible from
the eye, as shown in Fig. 7, which represents a pupil drawing
from a cylinder placed at the back of her own desk. The lower
edge of the frame rests on the desk. The Glass slants backward

Fig. 7. — Making the drawing.

from this edge away from the pupil so that the plane of the Glass L
is at right angles to a line from the eye to the center of the Glass.
The Glass must always be thus held at right angles to your line
of sight, both when you draw on it, and when you test the draw-
ing, for if not looked at perpendicularly the drawing upon its
surface will be foreshortened and thus distorted as are the spheres
in Fig. 6. The correct position will be given when the opposite
corners of the frame are held equally distant from the eye or
when the light is such that you can see your eye reflecting in
the center of the Glass.

25. Test for Position of Glass. — It is surprising how often
students while drawing foreshorten their Glass or paper to the
extent of 30° or even 45°. Many students are positive they
are looking at right angles to the surface, when the angle is 70° or
80°. A simple test for the position of 90° is given by placing the

14 DRAWING AND PAINTING SELF-TAUGHT

unsharpened end of a lead pencil that has no eraser in it flat
upon the Glass or paper so that the pencil stands at 90° to the
surface. Then if the pencil points to your eye and you see only
the sharpened end with none of the curved surface, you are
holding the drawing so that you see its actual proportions. If the
pencil does not point to the eye, you will readily move the Glass
or the drawing board, so that you can see only the end of the
pencil. Try this experiment once in a while, until your eye is
trained to measure the correct position without this aid.

26. Tracing or Measuring Delays Vision. — You should
follow the directions printed on the back of the sliding card and

Fig. 8. — Testing the drawing.

sketch entirely free-hand, without any measuring or pencil
tests, and without tracing or using the Glass as a finder. Until
your eyes have done their best, you should train them by sketch-
ing with the faintest lines you can see, and changing and correct-
ing them entirely by eye, until the sketch seems perfect. Then
you should hold it at arm's length, and on the apparent level
of the object, so that you can look from the object to the draw-
ing, back and forth, as quickly as possible, in a last effort to see
by eye some needed correction. When quite sure the drawing
is perfect, apply the final test of looking through the Drawing
Glass to see if each line of the drawing will cover the line of the
object which it represents. To do this hold up the Glass be-
tween the eye and the object, as shown by Fig. 8, and move it
back and forth until the width of the drawing covers the width
of the object, and then if the height of the drawing covers the

DRAWING SELF-TAUGHT 15

height of the object the proportions are correct, and any failure
of the lines of the drawing to cover those of the object shows
the mistakes you have made.

27. Size of the Drawing. — The larger the drawing on the
Glass the more surely you can discover your mistakes, but you
can not make the drawing any larger than the apparent size
of the object when measured at the full length of your arm, for
you must hold the Glass in your hands to test the drawing. You
should make the drawing as large as you possibly can and have
it cover the object when held at arm's length. If you make
your first sketch too large to do this, erase it entirely and make
a smaller drawing, and do the same thing if slight corrections
are needed. You will be tempted to erase only the incorrect
part, but you should not do this, for your effort is not to secure
quickly a sketch that will cover the object, but rather to train
your eyes to see truly. Most students make the mistake of
holding up the Glass to look through the drawing, without pre-
vious effort to correct the sketch by eye alone. This is a serious
mistake which will make it difficult to work on paper.

28. To draw well on paper you must train your eyes by dis-
carding all methods which substitute tracing, measuring or any
mechanical way of obtaining quickly a drawing on the Glass
that merely covers the object. Every drawing on the Glass that
does not involve visual and mental training in seeing relations
fails to give the education that finally develops power to see
more exactly than you can measure.

When you test the sketch on the Glass be sure to have the
bubble in the spirit-level visible in the center of the opening
and the Glass held just at right angles to the line of sight from
your eye to the object. This means that the Glass will be held
inclined, except when the object is on the level of your eye, or
extends both below and above this level.

29. Objects to Draw on the Glass. — The Glass is to train you
to see action, proportion and perspective effects, therefore you
should avoid not only small objects, but also large ones that are
too distant or have fine detail; for the crayon will not hold a
sharp point. Even if it would, you could not test details, there-
fore postpone such study until you work on paper, and draw
simple forms on the Glass at the start, and as long thereafter as
is necessary to enable you to see the essential angles and
proportions quickly and truly.

Small drawings can not be tested accurately, therefore your
model should be near enough or large enough for the sketch
on the Glass to nearly or quite cover the Glass. Small
objects should almost touch the Glass when the test is made,

16 DRAWING AND PAINTING SELF-TAUGHT

and objects less than two or three inches long should not be
drawn.

The objects to study must vary with the age of the pupil.
Young students may wish to begin with the graded lessons given
in Chapter IX. Older students may draw whatever interests
them as long as the subject is not too small, or too far away, or
too complex in form.

30. Distance of Objects. — The small object must be near
the student and the large one far enough away for the drawing to
nearly cover the Glass when it is held at arm's length. The near-
ness of the model when it is on a desk or table at which you sit, as
in Fig. 7, is an advantage, for you are not trying at first to
produce pleasing pictures but to train your eyes to see truly,
and the violent perspective of objects near you enables you to
discover and correct your mistakes more quickly than you
could if the objects were farther away. Pupils too young to use
the Glass when the objects are distant may use it without diffi-
culty when the object nearly touches the Glass.

When your eyes see truly, more pleasing perspective may be
obtained by placing objects near you on a box, or a pile of books,
to render the perspective less violent.

31. White Crayons for Evening Use. — The mark of a white
or bright colored "China Marking" crayon against a dark card-
board is easier to see by artificial light than that of a black
crayon above a white card, and you may use any colored crayon
and cardboard that you wish.

32. We See in a Sphere. — Fig. 8 shows how the Glass
must incline backward to test the drawing, when the object is
below the eye. It must incline forward, in the opposite direc-
tion, when the object is above the eye, and it must be held verti-
cal when an object is on the eye level. Thus you discover that
what you see is measured on a spherical surface and therefore
can not be truly laid flat or drawn on a plane surface. This is
the reason for the perspective distortion in Fig. 6 and in the
corners of any picture that includes large visual angles. You
should never draw any object when so near it that the visual
angles produced are larger than 30°. This means if you make
a full length portrait of a person five feet tall you should stand
at least ten feet away from him. The artist who has to represent
a subject which causes large visual angles should be influenced
by his vision and feeling, more than by science; yet he must
represent straight lines in nature by straight lines in his drawing,
and therefore he must apply perspective theory to such a prob-
lem. This means that he must not represent vertical lines by
lines that converge, even when the Glass proves that they appear

DRA WING SELF-TA UGHT 1 7

to do this. For the same reason the artist should seldom repre-
sent long horizontal lines in nature by the curves which he will
draw when working by sight and representing each different
part of the long line by the angle which it appears to make with
the horizon.

The Glass is to train the eye to see the appearance of single
objects that do not cause wide visual angles, but it may also
be used to give a practical knowledge of free-hand perspective
relating to extended visual angles. Even this free-hand study
of perspective, however, should not be begun until after the eye has
been trained to draw single objects truly without the aid of theory.

33. Holding Glass for Testing. — Before drawing any object
learn to hold the Glass to test a drawing on it. Place a pin with
a white head large enough to be visible when the pin is in the
most distant part of the room, anywhere on floor or wall or any
object in the room, and then indicate a point on the Glass by
fine vertical and horizontal lines that intersect. Next, hold the
Glass at arm's length with the spirit-level in the upper side of
the frame. Hold a short edge of the frame in each hand, face
the pin, and extend the arms equally, inclining the Glass so that
it is exactly at right angles to a line from the eye to the pin.
Then, having one eye closed, move the Glass so that the mark
on the Glass will appear to cover the head of the pin. When
this happens, look at the spirit-level, and if the bubble is not
visible in the center of the sight, move one hand slowly up or
down until the bubble remains in the center of the sight. See
that the point on the Glass still covers the head of the pin. A
small piece of paper may be placed upon a common pin for this test.

34. Testing Angle of a Line. — When you can hold the Glass
level so that a point on the Glass will cover the head of the pin
in any position in the room, represent on the Glass any horizontal
retreating line. Select any long line of the ceiling, wall, or
the top of a door or window, but do not select a line that is not
foreshortened. When you have drawn the line on the Glass,
test its angle by holding the Glass at arm's length and at right
angles to a line from your eye to the center of the line that you
are representing. Hold the Glass so that the bubble is visible
in the center of the level, and then move the Glass to see if the
line on the Glass will appear to cover the line that you are study-
ing. If it can not be made to do this you will realize the mistake
in its angle; and should erase the line and try again, until you
have the correct angle.

35. Testing the Angle and the Length. — When able to see
the angle correctly you should measure the length, in addition
to the angle, by making the line on the Glass of such a length

18 DRAWING AND PAINTING SELF-TAUGHT

that each end of the line on the Glass will cover the correspond-
ing end of the line that you are drawing. While testing keep
the bubble in the center of the sight and the Glass at right angles
to your line of vision.

36. Foreshortened Circle. — The next step is to represent
a foreshortened figure. The circle is the simplest for the first
lesson. Select a child's rolling hoop or the top of a circular
table and draw its appearance on the Glass without any measur-
ing of proportions. Then hold the sketch at arm's length and
compare it with the object, to see if you can not change the pro-
portions by eye. When as perfect as you can see, slide out the
card and raise the Glass, and move it back and forth between
your eye and the circle until the width of the drawing covers
the width of the circle. (See Fig. 8.) When this happens, if
the height of the drawing does not cover the height of the circle
your mistake in proportion is evident. In making this test you
must level the Glass by the spirit-level, otherwise you may think
an inclined ellipse will represent the horizontal circle.

Repeat this exercise, placing the circle at different levels,
below and above your eye and in various inclined positions.

37. The Foreshortened Square. — Place a card 12 in. square
flat upon the top of a square or rectangular table, and draw the
card on the Glass until you are able to make a correct sketch.
Then give yourself a systematic drill in judging angles by sitting
in one position, from which you can look at the card in a direction
oblique to the edge of the table and then draw the card in all
possible positions in which it can be placed with reference to the
edge of the table. If you made the first drawing from a posi-
tion directly in front of the table, you will find the second posi-
tion much more difficult, for the edge of the table appears hor-
izontal when you are just in front of it, and inclined when you
look at it obliquely, and you confuse this angle of the edge of
the table with that of the side of the square. After you have
made a- correct drawing of the square in its second position,
mark its position on the table, with a fine chalk line, then draw
another line at an angle of 15° with the first, and move the square
up to this second chalk line. You can get the angle of 15° by
trisecting one of 90° and then bisecting an angle of 30°. Cut
an angle of 15° from cardboard to enable you to move the square
five times more, and have the last move bring the square back
into its original position. Draw the square in each of its six
new positions without changing your own position. Repeat
this exercise until you find it is impossible for your eye to be
deceived by lines that are in front of, or behind those of the ob-
ject you are drawing.

DRAWING SELF-TAUGHT

38. Change Your Own Position. — Now try the same prob-
lem of the square upon the table top. Place the card at an angle
of 15° with the edge of the table and then draw the square from
any position. When the sketch is correct, move yourself 15° in
either direction around the table, but do not move the square.
When the square is correctly drawn for the second time, move
yourself 15° more in the same direction as before, and so continue
to move around the table, and the square, until you have drawn
the square from 24 different positions 15° apart in a circle around
the square and table. This exercise and the preceding one will
give you more power to see perspective effects truly than years
of study by usual methods.

39. The Square and Table. — When you can draw the square
readily, you may repeat the last two exercises, drawing both the
table and the square. There is no reason why you should not
draw a cube or a box instead of the square card. These exercises
should give you power to draw any object in two dimensions,

X^pi^A/

Fig. 9. — Blocking-in lines and tests.

or any solid; for all objects are seen as if they had but two
dimensions. When you can judge height, width, and angles
correctly, you can draw anything. This drill from geometric
forms makes your progress more rapid than it would be if you
began with casts, or the life model, for you can not correct such
drawings as closely or as quickly as those from geometric forms.
40. Blocking-in the Solid. — When the subject is a cube or a
box as in Fig. 9, you should not begin with any single edge, but
with the mass of the whole, as if the box had only the two dimen-
sions that can be represented by the silhouette of the box. Do
not make the common mistake of drawing all the lines forming

r

i

Fig. 10. — Examinations by the same student showing gain made in

GO hours.

DRAWING SELF-TAUGHT 21

this silhouette, but substitute one long line for two or more short
lines that break into the mass. Thus you avoid all concave
breaks into the convex form that will result by connecting the
outer corners of the object with the fewest possible lines that will
enclose the drawing. You should always avoid all detail in the
blocking-in lines, for detail should be studied last.

All that you should do, by the blocking-in lines that give
what is called the "primary mass," is to indicate the height and
width of the drawing, and its position on the Glass. This you
could do by two horizontal and two vertical lines, or even by four
points, but it is better to indicate the longest lines that will
enclose the mass of the silhouette, for their angles assist in deter-
mining the proportions correctly.

41. Study the Arrangement. — The blocking-in lines deter-
mine not only the proportions of the drawing but its size and
arrangement on the drawing tablet. These first trial lines should
be as light as possible in order that you may change the size and
position of the sketch without erasing, and may work upon the
Glass exactly as you must later work upon paper. Drawings on
paper will record all mistakes in the size of the drawing and its
arrangement on the paper. You should, therefore, try to make
the drawing on the Glass of such a size, and in the position which
will produce the best possible composition. This will aid you
in your later work on paper.

When the "primary mass" is as correct as you can see when
holding the sketch at arm's length and looking quickly from it
to the object, test by looking through the Glass. If it does not
prove true, erase the entire sketch and try again until the block-
ing-in lines give the correct proportions.

42. Proportion More Important than Detail. — Since the
lines inside the silhouette do not determine proportion as quickly
as the blocking-in lines, it is wise for you to make an extended
series of sketches that go no further than the blocking-in lines,
until you find yourself able to sketch these truly at first trial.
If the desire to finish a picture is stronger than your wish to
establish the solid foundation of real visual power, you may
represent all visible edges. The Glass is a sure teacher, and even
if you do not use it in the best pedagogical method, it will per-
form its mission, and correct your vision, if you persevere in
its use. Interest in your work is more important than the sub-
ject that you study, and if your interest in any special subject
impels you so strongly to draw it that you can not maintain
your interest in the geometric subjects which I have advised at
the start, by all means try the thing in which you are interested.
Doing this will aid you to realize the greater value of the sub-

Fig. 11. — Examinations by the same student show-
ing gain made in 70 hours.

DRAWING SELF-TAUGHT 23

jects which I have advised, and you will go back to them with
renewed interest.

The educator emphasizes the necessity for studying objects

■iM^H

pi

Fig. 12. — From drawing by Michael Angelo (1475-1564).

in their proper order and drawing each by definite steps. The
Drawing Glass simplifies this problem greatly, and most of what
I must tell you in order that you may become draftsmen and
painters through study in your own homes, relates simply to
the proper use of the Glass, and to artistic methods of work on
paper. The subject and details of steps, stages, and methods
are unimportant.

By this time you should be able to sketch so well on the Glass
that work on paper is advisable. For a long time, however,
after you begin to draw on paper you should take up the Glass
often, and practice on it for a few minutes. A student recently

CO t"

CO g

iO o
CO

o
Ph

Ph

-O

Fig. 14.— From sketch by Hans Holbein (1460-1524).

26 DRAWING AND PAINTING SELF-TAUGHT

told me that he found the Glass so helpful that in addition to
the twenty hours of class-room drawing from the antique done
in school each week, he found time for twenty hours of practice
at home on the Glass. This spirit and enthusiasm will bring
success to those whose work must be done wholly at home.

43. Sketching on Paper. — We see edges and represent them
by lines and so naturally we draw, erase, and correct lines one
at a time, but until the last is drawn we can not see the propor-
tions of the drawing. The fatal mistake of elementary instruc-
tion is in permitting this false method to continue. Correct
bulk and action will never result from the customary study of
details at the start.

44. The Masters' Methods. — Study the photographs of the
old masters' sketches, Figs. 1, 12, 13, 14 and 15, and see how
they began with faint suggestions of the masses, and made cor-
rections without erasing by drawing stronger lines that neglected
details, and expressed action and proportion. If you would
succeed you must adopt this method and cease to draw detail
until you have first found the place for it, by the blocking-in
lines that are essential to true proportion.

45. Discard the Eraser. — Do not use the eraser at all for
months, but see how many changes in mass and action you can
make in a few moments, by ceasing to draw slowly with finger
motion only. Instead, sketch freely and joyously from your
shoulder without moving the fingers at all.

46. Sketch Instead of Draw. — The beginner wastes years
before he finds out that he should sketch before he draws, and
that he should find the place for the final drawing by making
many sketches straight from the shoulder, one on top of the
other, each a little stronger than the preceding and a little truer
in proportions. See Figs. 1, 12 and 13.

47. Get Away from Your Sketch. — The beginner conscien-
tiously bends over his drawing that he may see each touch as
it is produced. After a few years thus wasted he discovers that
he can see the action, proportion, and effect, only when he is
far away from his work. Keep at least at arm's length from the
drawing and give yourself a chance to sketch from the shoulder.
It is said that Whistler used to paint with brushes whose handles
were six feet long. Every artist studies the effect of both sub-
ject and picture from the greatest distance possible in his studio
and often doubles this distance by use of a large mirror.

48. Paper. — The paper for the practice sketches may be of
the cheapest kind on which a pencil will mark without tearing
its surface. Cheap copy paper costing by the ream about one
cent for five or ten sheets 8}^ x 11 inches will answer for the

Fig. 15.— From sketch by Raphael (1483-1520).

28 DRAWING AND PAINTING SELF-TAUGHT

hundreds of sketches you should make in from one to five or ten
minutes each. Later work may be upon cheap white drawing
paper such as is used in the public schools. This should be 12 x 18
inches, and fastened upon a board of the same size by a thumb
tack in each corner.

49. Pencils. — Provide the six soft pencils B, up to and in-
cluding 6 B, also the medium grades H, B and F; and the hard
pencils H, 2H, and 4 H. You will need this variety when you
begin to make pencil paintings of light and shade and color values.
For outline only you will not need so many soft pencils.

Avoid using a short pencil unless you place it in a crayon holder.

Hold the pencil as if it were a stick of charcoal with its un-
sharpened end at the center of the palm of the hand, as shown by

Fig. 16. — From photograph.

When sketching use a pencil that is hard enough to enable you
to obtain the correct result without any use of the eraser. When
you erase from the start you prove your ignorance, and you fail
to get the best training or the best results.

A hard pencil may be used lightly enough to make all needed
corrections without indenting the paper or getting it so black
that you must erase in order to continue. When this condition
does arise do not use the eraser, but start anew on a clean piece
of paper, and avoid this condition in future by using a harder
pencil or less pressure on the paper.

As your vision improves you can use softer pencils, and you
should always use the softest ones that enable you to get results
without use of the eraser. The hard pencil, except in the pre-
liminary sketching, produces a sharp mechanical line and effect
which is not pleasing in a free-hand drawing.

50. Free Arm Movements. — Before drawing objects on paper,
overcome the slow mechanical method of drawing with motion
of the fingers, by frequent free-arm sketching of straight and
curved lines, using the entire arm and moving the shoulder joint
only.

DRAWING SELF-TAUGHT

In this practice and also when drawing objects, do not take the
pencil point off the paper, but cause it to make a faint mark in
all its movements back and forth along all the lines of all the
objects.

Practice first on the horizontal line and see how close to the
first line you can place the others. Sweep the pencil rapidly
back and forth across the paper many times until you have a
series of lines producing a band a quarter of an inch or more in
width. See Fig. 17. In the same way practice the vertical move-
ment, and then the oblique in various directions. Then try the
circle, and both wide and narrow ellipses.

Repeat these exercises daily until you can sketch a straight

Fig. 17. — Free arm movements.

line or an ellipse in one instant, and with one touch. Do not
imagine, however, that you must postpone drawing objects
until you have gained this facility, for these exercises may be
repeated once in a while with interest and profit years after you
have begun to produce and exhibit pictures.

A French artist once said that you should be able to sketch a
man falling from a building while he is in the air. Spoken before
the advent of skyscrapers, this expresses the spirit that should
direct your efforts, and you must try to develop speed that en-
ables you to sketch lines in less than one second.

51. Many Lines Desirable. — It is useless to expect correct
results or details at the start. In beginning give up the idea
that you are drawing and simply try to locate the place where
later you are going to draw. Many trial lines are desirable, not

30 DRAWING AND PAINTING SELF-TAUGHT

only because they permit repeated efforts to give correct results,
but because they enable you to experiment freely, and finally to
take your choice of the best line among many. You are free to
experiment by accenting first one and then another of these
trial lines, and you may finally strengthen and retain one of the
earliest touches. Until you adopt this method and refuse to be
satisfied with one clean sharp line for each edge, you have not
taken the first necessary step in the training of the artist.

Do not multiply lines without thought or observation, but
make as many changes as possible by means of tests applied
visually that cause you to think horizontal, vertical, and oblique
lines through every point and mentally continue every straight
line to intersect other lines. Gradually select and strengthen
the best lines. If, in spite of the use of a hard pencil, you get so
many lines that you can not make the needed changes without
erasing, throw the sketch aside and start one that can be perfected
in proportions without the eraser. Inability to sketch without

Fig. 18. — From photograph.

use of the eraser proves that desire to tell the exact truth all the
time, which distinguishes the mind of the scientist from that of
the artist. The artist must neglect the details at the start if
he is properly to relate them to the whole.

52. Position of the Drawing. — The drawing block or board
should be supported on an easel or a chair at right angles to a
line from your eye to the center of the paper. The drawing
board may be supported on the lap by use of a lap easel that is

DRAWING SELF-TAUGHT 31

clamped to the top of the board and extends to the floor to hold
the board from falling. See Fig 18. If you have not an easel
or chair to use in its place, hold the drawing board in the left
hand as far as possible from the eye.

53. Objects to Draw on Paper. — The subject is not as im-
portant as the method by which you study it, but if there is a
choice it favors the use of geometric forms in beginning, for these
are not only always at hand but they make the best method of
drawing easier to grasp than the forms of vegetable and animal
life. Therefore I advise the same forms as those which you have
studied on the Glass and for the first problem the box of Fig. 9.

54. Sketching a Box. — Sketch first the primary mass, see
Section 40. When the sketch seems perfect in its proportions
test it by use of a thread and the Glass. Hold the thread tightly
stretched across the Glass between the hands. Hold the Glass
so that the bubble remains in the center of the spirit-level, and
then move the thread about on the Glass until it forms a straight
line covering points 1 and 10 of the box. Having thus measured
the angle of the diagonal 1-10 hold the thread firmly in this
direction upon the Glass and place the Glass flat upon the draw-
ing so that the sides of the frame are parallel to the edges of the
paper, and the thread covers point 1 of the drawing. If the thread
also covers 10, then these points are correctly placed. Next
measure in the same way the angle of the diagonal passing through
the lower right-hand corner 5 of the box and the upper left-hand
corner 9 of the cover.

These tests will determine the proportions without the waste
of time due to placing detail in the wrong place. Therefore it is
better not to finish the first sketches by the lines within the
contours, but to sketch simply the primary mass until you can
do this readily and accurately, and only then to represent the
lines inside the contour. When you have done this as perfectly
as possible by eye alone, test the drawing by taking a horizontal
line with the aid of the spirit-level and a thread held horizontal
on the Glass to cover point 1 to note the position of the point 11
in the front edge of the box where the thread through 1 cuts it.
Then take a level line through the right-hand corner 5 to obtain
the position of 12 in which the thread cuts the front edge. In
the same way pass horizontal lines through the other corners
of the box to determine their levels. Then with a plumb-line
made of a thread tied to a lead button, take a vertical line through
9 to see its position between 3-4 and 5-6. Take another vertical
through 7-8. As a last test hold a thread taut in both hands be-
tween the eye and the box so that it covers the edge 4^6, and then
notice where the thread intersects edge 1-3 in 14. In the same

32 DRAWING AND PAINTING SELF-TAUGHT

way, continue 2-4 to intersect in 13. Then continue the inclined
edges 7-9 and 6-10 to note their intersections 15 and 16 with the
lower lines of the box. In this way continue the other lines of
the box, and if they intersect in the drawing as the thread appears
to intersect the box, you may be sure the sketch is correct. Make
all changes indicated by this use of the thread without any use

of the eraser, and continue to draw single objects until the tests
prove that you can draw them correctly by eye.

55. Sketching a Group. — Arrange several boxes in a group
similar to Fig. 19 and when you have sketched the primary mass
draw within it the primary mass of each box, thus representing
the "secondary" masses. Fig. 20. Before going further, it is
wise to use the spirit-level and a horizontal thread on the Glass
to find the levels of points 1 and 9, and 3 and 7. Make corrections
without use of the eraser and then sketch the inner edges of each
box.

56. Draw the Objects at the Same Time. — Draw the longest
lines of all the boxes first, and the shortest, last. Do not allow
one object to become more advanced than the others. Do not
look only at the object or line you are drawing but at those around
it, for as long as you look at one line or one object, you will not
represent it in the right place or of the right proportion.

After you have blocked in the mass of the entire group and
then within it the mass of each object, thus obtaining the secon-
dary mass, Fig. 20, draw next the longest lines that are easiest to
see and relate, and then the lines of intermediate length without
regard to the object they define. Never finish one object until
the others are nearly as far along. Think of all the objects as

DRA WING SELF-TA UGHT 33

parts of the same object, neglecting the shortest lines of all the
objects until all the long lines are drawn. Fig. 21.

Shift and twist and change without any erasing until your
eye can do no more. Then take the Glass and a thread and pass
a horizontal line through every corner of every box to note the
levels of these points. Change as soon as the test shows an error.

Fig. 20. — Secondary masses. Fig. 21. — Testing sketch.

Then with the plumb-line pass a vertical line through every
corner, and change as fast as these tests discover mistakes.
Finally, continue every long line of every object to see where
each line intersects the other lines. Do this by holding only the
thread taut between the two hands and in front of you as if it
were resting on the Glass held for testing,, and then revolve the
hands until the thread covers any line, as 7-14, and cuts the
contour near 18. See if the drawing agrees by placing the thread
flat on the drawing to cover 7 and 14. If it does not intersect in
the proper point near 18 the sketch must be changed until it does.

It is impossible for an error to remain undetected if all these
tests are applied, and you must use them all until they train you
to think horizontal, vertical, and oblique lines, through every
point as you sketch, and also to think the lines continued to
intersect others. When you think these tests you will draw so
truly that the use of the thread and level for corrections will dis-
cover no mistakes, and soon you will find your eyes are more
exact than the tests which you will no longer need.

57. True Levels Important. — A sketch whose proportions
are correct will look incorrect if its levels are wrong. The artist
fails on levels, that is, on perspective angles, more than on any
other subject. You should take special pains when testing levels,

34 DRAWING AND PAINTING SELF-TAUGHT

and never trust to holding a pencil or ruler by your eye. The
spirit-level is the only sure test for angles. The best way to use
it is to make cuts in the opposite sides of the frame that will
hold a thread exactly parallel with the top edge of the frame and
about two inches below it. Make the cuts deep enough with a
sharp knife so that they will retain the thread, and when you use
it face the object and stretch the arms out equally and be sure
the bubble remains in the center of the sight. Do not try to use
the level to test the drawing, but place the thread alone flat on
the drawing and adjust it by eye so that it is parallel with the
edge of the paper.

58. Still Life Best for Beginner. — No subject will give true
eyes for perspective as quickly as these boxes, and you should
continue to draw them until you can sketch a half dozen of differ-
ent sizes and proportions in five minutes so correctly that the
tests will discover no mistakes. Use small paper boxes on a
table part of the time, and larger wooden boxes on the floor in
later work.

59. Honest Training in Place of Dishonest Pictures. — Until
elementary drawing means vision training instead of picture
making, it will require courage to make sketches while you know
other students are making finished pictures. If you are able to
carry out these directions you will some time be as grateful for
them as are my personal students, who often tell me that this
study from the boxes helped them more than any other work in
their entire course and finally enabled them to draw the figure
better than students who had spent all their time on the antique
and life. See p. viii. and Figs. 4 and 5.

60. Draw the Background Instead of the Object. — When
you can draw the boxes, study a chair by sketching first the
blocking-in lines, and next the background spaces composed of
the bits of floor or wall seen between and through the rounds,
legs, and other parts of the chair. In other words, draw the
holes instead of the parts that bound these holes. See Fig. 22.

This is the best of all tests because it can be applied without
thread, level or Glass, far more exactly than you can see the
solids. You know the solids and this prevents you from seeing
their appearance. The background spaces or holes have no real
existence or form for you to know, and so you can believe your
eyes about their appearance long before your eyes are true for
the solid. Students who adopt this method soon excel those
who continue to draw the legs and rounds.

61. Accenting the Sketch. — You should now finish a drawing
occasionally in outline or values, as desired. If in outline, erase
the trial touches and accent the final lines with one stroke of a

Drawings by the
Same Freshman.

Entrance

Examination

September 28.

Faulty in

Proportion and

Perspective.

Examination

November 30.

Better Proportions

and

Perspective.

Shows artist's way
of sketching back-
ground spaces in-
stead of the solid
parts.

fi

j? Zoo . (£ hrs. Nov, 3 0

Fig. 22. — Drawing the holes instead of the objects.

Jft

-if

m

ii-ff

t 1

i

/2wr

Fig. 23. — Freshman sketches showing blocking-in lines.

g

b0

v

38 DRAWING AND PAINTING SELF-TAUGHT

soft pencil which produces a soft gray line, except where you
need a few accents of black.

In accenting hold the pencil as you desire, and move it from the
fingers, wrist, elbow, or shoulder. Accent the object forms and
their construction, and be sure not to accent the background
forms that aided in the drawing. These forms are too pronounced
in Fig. 22 because the sketch was barely started.

There is no rule for accenting except to make the sketch effec-
tive in presenting the important objects, their relations and
construction by the greatest possible variety in the strength and
the width of the lines employed. You must use your judgment,
for any rule will produce mechanical results. You should omit
all unimportant details and bring out the nearest and most
important parts with the heaviest lines. Do not think this means
any regular gradation from front to back, for such would be
fatal to an artistic effect.

62. Interiors and Street Scenes. — When you can draw groups
of furniture represent the room, and then draw everything that
interests you, in-doors and out-doors. You will find that a little
practice will enable you to draw human and animal forms from
the cast or from life as well as you draw the geometric forms.
This proves the wisdom of beginning with the geometric forms,
for many artists who draw the figure well fail in subjects that are
geometric.

63. Use a Sketch-Book. — Carry a sketch-book with you all
the time for use in minutes that would otherwise be lost. Use
this book from the beginning of your study, and do not think
that you must master each problem in the order that I have
given it before you try any other subject. Every subject trains
the vision when it is rightly studied, and so you may draw in
your sketch-book anything that interests you, including casts,
figures, animals, and memory drawings, as well as any nature
study.

64. Make Color Sketches. — Do not try to master drawing
before you begin to paint simple subjects, but work in color
often enough to prove that you need to draw most of the time
until the drawing does not trouble you when you paint.

65. Detail Important. — When you can represent mass and
action, you must begin to study detail as if it were most important.
You should study reproductions of paintings by Meissonier,
Charles Bargue or any good miniature painter to see how it is
possible to keep the strength and breadth of the masses and still
represent all essential detail.

66. Figure Drawing. — Do not think your training is over
when you can draw still life and geometric subjects easily, for

DRAWING SELF-TAUGHT 39

this is the simplest of your problems and given first in order to
prepare you quickly to draw the figure well. The figure you
should sketch as you have the boxes, beginning with the blocking-
in lines of the whole and then giving those of the smaller masses.

67. Avoid Fads. — Do not be misled by exhibitions which
often present brutal or freak results, for this work will be for-
gotten in a few years, while if you can learn to draw, model, color,
and express character and sentiment, your work may in time
hang in the galleries with that of the masters of the past who
have been inspired by love of truth and beauty.

68. Art School the Beginning. — If it is not your pleasure and
recreation to draw and paint, probably you would better choose
some other vocation. If your work is not a joy to you it can never
give joy to others. The best is always done for the joy of creat-
ing and for no other reward.

I do not mean that you should not find time for recreation,
sport, or social life, for you must take your thought from art
often enough to rest your eyes and refresh your mind. I do mean
that you must make your art study your chief thought and in-
terest in life, and that you must give your whole heart and soul
to it while you are engaged in studio practice or in study.

Examination by first-year student.

Chapter III.
PAINTING SELF-TAUGHT.

69. Color Perception Rare. — We are born color blind, and
very few ever overcome this defect. All the painters in the world
were blind to out-door effects until the early part of the nine-
teenth century when Constable and a few other English painters
broke away from the false traditions of all earlier painters of
landscape, and began to represent the light and color of landscape
effects. Turner was said to have lost his sense of color, or his
mind, or both, when he began to use color instead of the browns
of all early landscapes.

70. This failure to see truly is due to the fact that the student
has had no science to aid him to true vision, and has thus de-
pended on his teacher's eyes or methods. If the artists of the
past saw the light and color in landscapes, they were either afraid
to believe, or afraid to paint what they saw, and so the false
conventions of their teachers were continued. Today, for the
first time, we have a test that will make color appearances visible
to a child, and enable the art student to discover his mistakes in
values and color, even more readily than he finds errors in draw-
ing by the aid of a spirit-level.

71. Sir Joshua Reynolds explained how to see color in the
following paragraph from Discourse XI. "Excellence will never
be acquired by an artist unless he has the habit of looking upon
objects at large and observing the effect which they have on the
eye when it is dilated and employed upon the whole, without
seeing any of the parts distinctly."

This clear statement has not been understood by artists or
students, and so the most talented have often had to struggle
for twenty years to realize the great difference between the actual
colors of objects and their apparent colors when influenced by
light and shade, contrast, reflections, and distance. Chapter II
of "Color Study" by the author explains these color changes,
and shows that the eye sees the actual local color less often than
it sees the actual form of any object. This happens because the
apparent form is always the same as the actual form unless there
is foreshortening, and a circle will appear a circle even if a mile
distant, unless seen obliquely. To see the actual color, however,
it must be very near the eye, and not influenced by light and

PAINTING SELF-TAUGHT 41

shade, contrasting colors, or reflected lights from other objects.
This makes it practically impossible ever to see such a thing as
local color, for all color appearances are in the eye of the observer,
and continually changing.

72. The Blur Glass. — An aid to the vision described by Rey-
nolds is the most important problem for the teacher or student.
Thirty years ago I found that a magnifying glass that would
blur away details and show simply the big masses, was a great
aid to students who could learn to look at the image on the lens
instead of through the lens. Many students could not do this,
and looking through the lens they strained their eyes and still
saw the detail, which the lens was intended to take out, and the
actual colors instead of the apparent colors. To enable all stu-
dents to see apparent colors and not to exaggerate detail is a
problem only recently solved by the use of two blur glasses.

73. The Painting Lenses. — These consist of two magnifying
glasses mounted side by side in the lower piece of the frame of
the "Drawing Glass," or in a special adjustable frame for artists'
use.

Drawing or painting from a copy is so easy that almost any
one can copy with but little training, and copy very well, even
when not able to work at all from nature. This is because the
comparison in copying is between the copy and the original
which are both on flat surfaces and beside each other, while in
painting from nature the comparison must be between the two
dimensions of the drawing and the three dimensions of nature.
The most talented student can not reduce the solidity of nature
to its appearance on a picture plane without many long years of
study, while by usual methods the average student never does it.

The painting lenses enable the beginner to see with the master's
vision as soon as he succeeds in looking at the lenses or rather
between them instead of through them. By closing one eye and
looking between the two lenses, it is easy to observe the images
on the lenses as if they were pictures painted on the glass.

The lenses are used by holding them up between the eye and
the object so that the object may be seen in one lens while the
drawing or painting is seen in the other lens. The painting must
be placed a few feet away from the object. You must close one
eye and with the other see both lenses equally in the same glance.
You must forget that one reflects the subject and the other your
picture, and see simply two equally blurred pictures side by side,
and on the lenses instead of behind them. Thus you may gain
in one lesson the blurred all-over vision that Reynolds described,
and see better than many artists ever do. This may appear a
strong statement, but that you may realize what the right use of

Brush drawings by the same student. The upper made
April 7, before use of Painting Glass.

Fig. 25. — Matle April 11, aided by Painting Glass.

PAINTING SELF-TAUGHT 43

the lenses will mean to you, I will tell you that in a public lec-
ture recently given at the Art Museum, the lecturer, a noted
artist, said that one lesson with the aid of the Glass would give
knowledge that could not be gained in years of study without
this aid. Another artist said to me recently that many well
known artists were using the Painting Lenses, so you need not
hesitate to use the method that has been approved by the best
painters.

74. It seems a simple matter to use the lenses as described
above, but even after personal explanations and after reading
the directions on the back of the Glass which tell how one eye
must be closed all the time, and the other used, not alternately
on one lens and then on the other, but equally on or rather be-
tween both, I have known adults to use the lenses for many
months before they gained the proper blurred vision of one eye
that sees the blurred pictures on the lenses instead of the draw-
ing and the subject behind the lenses. Therefore, I will repeat
these directions at greater length, and say that if you will follow
them exactly there will come a moment in which you will suddenly
be born again visually, and see color appearances truly, instead
of the local colors that you know and believe you ought to see.
This new vision will transform your work from the hard, literal
rendering of the facts you know to be before you, to the vision of
the masters who have painted the beauty of light, color, and
atmosphere.

True vision is not a question of years of study so much as of
inspiration that is often instantaneously effective in transforming
the vision permanently, so that after this inspired moment
there may be little need for the lenses. It is possible that Art
School students may not need to use the lenses often when they
enter Art Schools having been prepared to draw in the Grammar
School by use of the Drawing Glass, and to paint in the High School
by use of the Painting Glass. Still many of the best painters find
the lenses helpful, and so they may be to you occasionally through
life.

75. Use of Lenses in Painting. — Arrange a group of still life
so that the light falls on it from a north window and comes from
over your left shoulder in such a direction that when you place
your painting a few feet to the right or left of the group, it will
have as strong a light upon it as falls on the group.

Whatever the medium you use you should try to get the entire
canvas covered as quickly as possible so that it will present the
same masses of light and shade or color as the subject. Therefore,
before beginning to paint, you should study the effect by looking
at the subject through one lens, moving the lens back and forth

44 DRAWING AND PAINTING SELF-TAUGHT

until the subject fills the entire lens. Then you should stop
looking through it and look at it, or rather in front of it, and study
the blurred colors seen, or rather felt upon the lens, until you are
sure of their colors and values.

It is better for you to use the lens than to partly close your
eyes, for doing this shuts out the light and the color, while the
lens will show you so much color that you can hardly believe it
the true color needed in your picture. When you have gained a
strong impression of the colors and the effect, so that you can lay
in the effect from memory, cover the entire canvas with color to
all the outer edges. Do this as quickly and strongly as possible,
and when the canvas is fully covered and you can not improve
the effect, place it far enough to the right or to the left of the
group for you to see the group through one lens and the painting
through the other lens. Then having closed one eye; use the
other to see both lenses equally with a blurred vision that is
directed midway between both lenses. Do not move either the
lenses or the eye in order to compare the blurred pictures of the
drawing and the subjects.

76. Look Between Not Through the Lenses. — When you
have thus varied the distance of the painting from the subject,
and the distance of the lenses from the eye until you can see the
painting through one lens and the subject through the other, you
must stop looking through the lenses and look between them so as
to observe them equally at the same time with one eye. The
lenses blur the detail, and the effort to see the lenses without
moving the eye from one to the other blurs the images still more,
and takes out all except the masses of light, dark, and color that
are important in the effect.

When you look between the lenses you can forget the drawing
and the subject behind the lenses, and see their effect on the
picture-plane of the lenses. This vision enables you instantly to
see if your painting blurs differently from the subject; if it does,
you realize what you must do to make the painting blur like the
subject, before you begin to put in the detail.

77. This vision does not strain the eyes, for it is not the trying
effort to see detail but the unlabored vision with which you might
see a landscape if nearly asleep, and not looking at any object
but barely aware of the lights of the sky and foreground, and
the dark of the shadowed forest.

Possibly this idea of seeing when nearly asleep will help you to
get the right idea of the all-over vision that is needed to paint
well. The eye is an exact automatic and scientific machine
which adjusts itself quickly to see sharply a minute part of the
object before it. All points except that on which it is focussed

PQ

I

V v. ^

r^vvc \

to

C j

On

lo

i

46 DRAWING AND PAINTING SELF-TAUGHT

are seen in the blurred way that is essential for the artist. There-
fore you must not look at the detail you want to paint, and you
must not look at the lens but in front of it, or if two lenses are
used, you must look between them. In other words, you must
not see either the group behind the lens or its image on the lens,
but must feel or be aware of a blurred image that may be in front
of or on the lens, but never behind the lens or on the object.

This comparison of the effect of the subject and the painting
is the most important service given by the Painting Lenses, for it
teaches you to see simply, to subordinate details, and to see on
your picture-plane instead of on the objects. The Glass is also
useful for the study of details, and especially for the color of
glitter lights as follows.

78. Mass and Detail Both Necessary. — Do not think that
you are to leave your picture in the blurred way in which you see
nature through the lenses, for you must give careful drawing of
all action and construction, and especially of the sharp beginnings
of the cast shadows which are lost by the lenses. You must give
the effect seen by the use of the lenses, and also the important
detail which you see when you look for it without the use of the
lenses. Your finished picture with all needed detail will, however,
lose detail when seen through the lens just as the other lens blurs
away the detail in the subject.

79. Color of Glitter Light. — This light is generally made too
bright and white. To realize that it has much color in it, hold
one lens so that the glitter light is magnified to fill or nearly fill
the lens. You may need to get near the object for this to happen,
and thus show you the strong color which the high light appears
to have. It may help you to see color in the high light if you
realize that this light is a reflection of the source of the light, and
would be the color of this source but for the local colors of the
object and others around it. Thus the glitter light on a red apple
is often quite blue, and it is always a different hue from that of
the adjacent parts.

80. Mass of Shadow. — You can determine the form of the
dividing line of light and shade that separates the light mass
from the shadow mass on any object by getting near enough to
cause this object to blur and fill one lens. Then you will not
only realize the light and dark, but the colors of these masses,
one being warm and the other cola1.

81. Object and Background Relations. — Hold one lens near
enough to the group to cause half the lens to reflect any object
and the other half to reflect the background, and then look at
the lens and you will see which is tho darker and which is the
warmer.

PAINTING SELF-TAUGHT 47

Any two objects, values, or colors may be thus compared by
making both fill the whole of one lens if the two are adjacent,
or if they are removed in the group by getting one to fill one lens
and the other to fill the other lens. To do this you may get as
near to the group as may be necessary, but do not look at it from
a new angle.

82. Color Easier than Drawing. — Thus used the lenses make
color perception easier than drawing, and so encourage you to
gain the ability to draw which must underlie real success in
painting.

Most art students desire to paint, and the long years of study
of drawing generally necessary become a trial. I have found
that the lenses encourage students to keep on with their drawing,
for I now give my first-year art school students instruction in
both drawing and painting from the start. Use of the lenses for
a short time proves that they can paint so much better than they
can draw that they prefer to give up color study and concentrate
on drawing.

83. Color Changes. — Correct values or relations of the lights
and darks of a picture are important, but of greater importance
are the changes which are made in color by light and shade and
contrast effects. The student expects to paint a red apple with
different tones of the same red pigment, and a blue vase with
light and dark tones of the same blue pigment, but after study of
objects of various colors by the use of the lenses it will be seen
that the color changes from warm to cold, or from cold to warm,
as often as the light and shade changes, and that it is impossible
to represent an object of any color by use of different tones of
one pigment.

Every change from light to shadow which is easy for you to see
means also a change in hue which is not so easy to see, but faith-
ful use of the lenses will discover the rule that if the light side of
any object is warm the shadow side will appear cold, and if the light
side is cold the shadow side will be warm. It is evident that the
strongest effect of local color will not be seen in either the strong-
est light or the deepest shadow, but between the two, and near
the dividing line of light and shade.

It is impossible to produce a vital effect without conforming to
this law of contrast between the masses. Understanding the
law will aid you to see the changes from warm to cold which
appear on objects that are of one unvaried local color.

84. You must use your judgment in your use of the lens to
determine the effect of the first painting, for you can not follow
the lens exactly if a detail, such as a painted design, comes in
either the mass of the light or the shadow. This detail will not

PAINTING SELF-TAUGHT 49

be seen through the lens as design but will change the color and
value of the mass in which it comes. An effect of this nature
should not be represented in the first painting, for the design must
be put in later in its definite form. This can not be done if you have
already represented its value in a blurred form over the surface.

85. Then there are accidental effects of complementary
colors apparent when the lenses are used too long to study bright
colors. These arise in the same way as the purple images in the
sky after you have looked at the setting sun, and they should not
be represented.

86. Other Aids to Vision. — Two small holes may be made in
a card, or the fingers of each hand may form openings to isolate
any two values or colors that are not too near each other to be
thus compared. The finder, used by artists to study the com-
position, will also aid in the matter of values and colcr. Instead
of one finder it is better to prepare two of the same size and to
cover one side of each with the whitest cardboard, and the other
side with the blackest velvet. When your subject is light look
at it through the white side, and you will see that there is no
white in the effect, for the white cardboard near the eye and in
full light almost invariably appears much lighter than any light
in the subject. When the subject is dark, look at it through the
black velvet side and shade the finder with the hand so that the
black in shadow may help you to realize that the darks in the
subject are not really black but have much color in them. To
use these finders arrange the painting so that it may be seen
through one finder while the subject is seen through the other.
Use only one eye and look between the finders instead of through
them one at a time.

87. Frame Around Subject. — Artists often place a frame
about their subject, and sometimes a similar one about the paint-
ing. Sometimes the frame around the subject is divided into
equal squares by horizontal and vertical threads. If you have
followed the directions of Chap. II. carefully you will probably
not need the squares to help in drawing. The frames may, how-
ever, aid you to see effects and masses in the same way that the
lenses do.

Fig. 28 represents a group of still life and a painting of this
group when placed beside the group for comparison. You must
not conclude that the marked differences between the two are
entirely due to mistakes in the painting, for the common photo-
graph often distorts values and color relations even more than
it distorts the perspective in Fig. 6. For tests of values and color
you must rely upon the use of the lenses, as a photograph will
seldom give either light and shade or color values truly.

DRAWING AND PAINTING SELF-TAUGHT

88. Red, Yellow, and Blue Pigments. — Red, yellow, and blue
were once considered the primary colors because from pigments
of these colors all the other colors could be obtained by mixture.
By mixing colored lights instead of pigments, the true primary

Fig. 28. — From photograph of painting placed on easel beside the subject,
frame encloses the subject.

colors, that can not be obtained by mixing other colors, are found
to be orange, green, and violet. But the artist must use pigments,
and so the true theory for his assistance in mixing them is the old
theory that red, yellow, and blue are the primaries.

Red and Yellow combine to make Orange; Yellow and Blue
combine to make Green; Blue and Red combine to make Violet.
Orange, Green, and Violet are thus the secondaries by the pig-
ment theory. Orange and Green combine to make Citrine or a
yellow gray. Green and Violet produce Olive or a green gray.
Violet and Orange produce Russet or a red gray. These grays
are called tertiary colors. Red, Blue, and Yellow when mixed to
neutralize each other produce the neutral Black.

Black mixed with any primary, secondary, or tertiary darkens
the color, and the result is called a Shade. White mixed with
any color lightens it, and the result is called a Tint.

Before attempting to paint in oils, water-colors, or pastels,
you should make all the above mixtures and repeat them as
many times as may be needed to enable you to match any color,
or tint, or shade of any color; and to be perfectly sure that the
only pigments that the artist needs are red, yellow, and blue,
black, and white.

PAINTING SELF-TAUGHT 51

89. Avoid Many Pigments. — The price lists of color makers
include hundreds of colors to the confusion of the student who is
thus influenced to use too many. The objections to many pig-
ments are that colors often act chemically on each other, and the
more colors you use the greater the chance that the picture will
become black and colorless in time. Every added color means
more time taken in finding it in the box and on the palette, so
you should confine yourself to a few pigments which you have
tested separately and together to be sure that they are perma-
nent and do not destroy each other.

Test pigments by combining them and by mixing them with
white, and placing the results on canvas which is to be exposed
to sunlight for months or years.

90. Warm and Cold Colors. — Colors are called warm or cold
according to the preponderance of the pigments that compose
them. Red and yellow are the warm colors, and any mixture
in which these predominate is a warm color. Blue is the cold
color, and any mixture in which it is most active is a cold color.
Do not try to name each individual color and mixture, but learn
to classify all as warm or cold. To aid in doing this hold your
palette as far as possible from the eyes, or, better still, place it
on a small table as far away as you can reach to mix the warm
and cold tones. Do not try to remember the colors that you
mix for any effect, but be guided entirely by your use of the
lenses. If they show that your sketch is warmer than the subject,
you must add more blue. If the lens that reflects the painting is
bluer than that which reflects the subject, then add more red
and yellow. If the lens that reflects the painting is lighter than
that which reflects the subject, then add more red, yellow, and
blue, and if it is darker than the lens that reflects the subject,
you must add more light colors or more white until the two
blurred images on the lenses are exactly alike in warm and cold
color and in light and dark.

When you compare your painting with nature be sure you
have as strong a light upon it as that upon the group. If you
can not get this light without foreshortening the surface of the
picture you may place it at any oblique angle that may be
needed to make the lights of the painting equal those of the
subject.

91. Truth is Difficult. — Nothing is more difficult than truth
of color, tone, atmosphere, and drawing; and nothing begins to
equal the beauty which this truth gives. The painters who
have approached truth are generally the greatest in art. Realize
this, and work for truth until you can express it, and then it will
be easy for you to paint in a lighter or darker key than nature,

DRAWING AND PAINTING SELF-TAUGHT

or in a warmer or colder scale of color, and you may also change
the composition as you wish.

Avoid crudity of color in the painting that is apparent when
the lenses are used. The attempt to reproduce the light and
color of nature often results in a crude or chalky painting unless

Fig. 29. — Half-hour brush drawing by first-year student.

you use the lenses often to overcome the effect arising from the
use of pigments, as they come from the tube or the pan.

92. Tube Colors are Crude. — Crudity is almost sure to re-
sult from the use of pigments as they are found in the tube or the

PAINTING SELF-TAUGHT 53

pan of the color maker. Generally two colors at least must be
combined to avoid crudity, and it is better to have a little of
each primary pigment in every tone used.

The impressionists avoid this crudity by using pure pigments
in such small spots that they blend in the eye when seen from a
proper distance, and produce a richness of tone and color that is
difficult to obtain by pigments mixed with the brush. This method
permits great strength and refinement of color, but it is a slow
method and not advisable for the student, who should try to
mix colors on the palette so as to cover quickly the entire canvas.

93. Direct Painting Advisable. — When it is possible to pro-
duce such results at one painting as those by Sargent or Redfield,
their beauty and strength equal or exceed any effects gained by
slower methods. If you are able to do your best by one painting
you are fortunate indeed. But if you must repaint, remember
that there are very few painters who do not do their best work
in this way.

Do not repaint, however, by placing one solidly painted sketch
on top of the first one, for the colors and the technique of the
first will show through the second painting. If the first solid
painting is not satisfactory, scrape it off entirely, and repaint
upon the clean canvas. If parts are satisfactory, retouch the
other parts when they are dry by a thin glaze of transparent
color, or by scumbling, or hatching.

94. Toned Pigments. — Some artists prepare and tone their
colors for each picture before they begin to paint, and complete
formulas have been devised to obtain a toned and harmonious
picture.

You should avoid all methods that substitute a formula or
rule for visual appearances, but you need not hestitate to tone
your colors, or even to prepare toned colors in tubes.

Toned pigments may now be purchased in both oils and water-
colors, and, if your color sense is not keen, they will aid you to
avoid crude color. If you use toned colors, you will also need
pure red, yellow, and blue whenever the subject is light and
brilliant or strong in color.

Select the pigments that suit you best, making sure they are
permanent, and do not use more than half a dozen on any one
sketch. When your subject is light, use light colors, and when
the subject is low toned, select darker pigments. Do not adopt
without trial the palette of any artist, no matter how noted.

95. Avoid Heaviness. — Never paint any darker than is
necessary to produce the desired effect, for all pigments darken
or lose color by exposure to light. You can almost see some
modern paintings change, so rapidly do they darken in only a few

54 DRAWING AND PAINTING SELF-TAUGHT

years of exposure under the best conditions of light and atmos-
phere. When you paint pictures to be kept, it is better to make
them lighter and brighter than nature, for if you do not, time will
soon make them so dark that they will lose all truth and beauty.
When copying an old master you should remember that it was
far lighter before age, varnish, and dirt reduced its light and
color.

96. Impossible to Equal Nature. — When fou place your
picture in the same light as the subject, you may closely repro-
duce its colors so that the blurred images of the two lenses will be
of the same strength if the colors of the subject are not too dark.
When the subject has black or dark objects you can not equal
their strength, for there are light and shade on every object, and
the shadow side of a black object must be darker than the light
side. The shadow side must be represented by black, and a
much lighter tone must represent the light side of the object.
When you compare the painting with the subject by use of the
lenses, the comparison is of black which is in shadow on the
object, with black which is in light on the drawing or painting.
In this case the best that you can do is to use black for the shadow
side and make the values of all the other parts agree with this
strongest dark. If you keep these relations simple and true,
you can make an effective picture which is much stronger than
at first thought seems possible. This is due to the fact that the
black object in shadow is often so far away from the eye that,
when looked at through the shaded side of the black velvet finder,
it appears quite gray.

It is of course impossible to equal sunlight effects or even the
brilliancy of glitter lights on polished objects in the studio. True
values will, however, result in satisfactory effects if you do not
attempt details at the expense of masses.

97. Brushes. — Buy the largest and the smallest brushes made,
for both oils and water-colors. Always use the largest brush
that will not interfere with the drawing of necessary detail.

For oil-colors, bristle brushes come in many forms. You will
determine the best forms by practice. A few small red sable
brushes will, however, be needed for fine details.

For water-colors, red sable brushes that come to a sharp fine
point are best. Camel's hair and Japanese brushes are cheaper.
A short stiff bristle brush may be used to take out water-color
that is too dark. A small red sable brush should be provided
for fine drawing.

98. Method of Painting. — In any medium strive to produce
the tone and effect of the subject as quickly as possible and to
cover the canvas or paper right out to all the corners, so that you

Fig. 30. — Brush drawings by first-year students.

56 DRAWING AND PAINTING SELF-TAUGHT

may place the brightest light, and the strongest dark, without
delay, and test the effect and masses by the use of the two lenses.
Before you begin to paint study the effect through one lens, and
all the time as you work, use the blurred vision Reynolds de-
scribed until the masses and effect are true. After this is accom-
plished you can focus your eyes on the detail needed to finish the
picture. It is better to put in too little than too much detail.
After it is all represented you should always apply the test of
the lenses, to see that the detail does not show any more strongly
in the lens that reflects the painting than it does in the lens that
blurs the subject.

Avoid the common mistake of insisting on obtaining effects at
first touch. A few great artists have done this, but they did not
do it when they were students, and you will never do it if you
ape the cleverness which the masters gained only after a life-
time of hard work.

99. Art Should Follow Truth.— When able to tell the truth
about nature's appearances study the works of all schools and all
painters, and feel free to improve on nature if you can do this
with' a distinct and genuine purpose of your own, and with no
thought of copying others' results, or methods. Tell your own
story in your own way and win on your own merits. There is no
chance of winning by being a copyist.

PAINTING IN CHARCOAL.

100. Charcoal is the easiest medium for the beginner, as it
requires little thought except for form and values. Until you can
tell the truth about these, it is wise to avoid the more difficult
proMems involved in subjects that require thought for drawing,
values, color, and technique all at the same time. Simple effects
in color may, however, be attempted as described in Sections 129
and 130 before you are able to draw.

Aim to represent the light and shade and color values of ob-
jects and background so fully that if you were color blind, and
should compare the charcoal drawing with the subject by the aid
of the lenses, the lights and darks in both lenses would appear
exactly alike to the very edges of the paper.

101. Produce the tones by placing a large round stick of the
softest charcoal flat on the paper, and passing it over the entire
surface as quickly as possible. Rub the tones thus produced
lightly into the paper with the hand or a cloth, and then draw
the detail and strengthen the tones as needed with the end of a
stick of charcoal, which may be hard and sharpened to a fine
point if desired. Take out lights with a piece of Art Gum or a

PAINTING SELF-TAUGHT 57

clean stump. Fix the drawing with liquid white shellac diluted
with denatured alcohol, until it is about twice as sticky when
almost dry on the fingers, as is the fixatif usually prepared by
art supply stores.

102. Spray the fixatif on the face of the drawing with a fold-
ing tin atomizer, being careful not to get near enough for drops to
form and wash the charcoal away. You may paint the fixatif
on the back of the drawing after placing the drawing face down-
ward between two sticks upon which the edges may be fastened
with tacks. Use a large bristle brush for this purpose.

Make quick sketches on half sheets of charcoal paper, and
finished studies on entire sheets.

Always make all drawings and paintings life size or as near this
as the paper will permit.

My book " Light and Shade" explains the theories which you
will discover for yourself if you use the lenses as directed. Do
not study this book until you can make effective sketches in a
half-hour, and do not attempt such finished results as those
shown in this book until after you can make the half-hour sketch
that stands the test of the two lenses.

PAINTING IN WATER-COLOR.

103. You should begin with monochrome, using charcoal
gray or cold sepia in tubes. Any cheap white paper will do for
quick sketches, but you should use pure cold- pressed linen or
water-color paper for finished studies.

Before you begin to paint, study the effect carefully by use of
one lens held at such a distance from the subject and your eye
that the subject fills the lens. Look at the lens and not through it,
as if the blurred image were painted on the lens; and memorize
the forms and colors so that you could work from memory. Be-
sides studying the effect of the entire group by use of one lens,
it is well to move near enough to the group to be able to make
each object in the group fill the entire lens, that you may separate
the mass of light from the mass of shadow. Any part of any
object may be made to fill the lens that its color may be seen.
After this careful study of the effect, begin the painting, using
the wet method or the dry method as you prefer.

104. The Wet Method. — Thoroughly soak the paper and a
piece of blotting-paper of the same size. Place these papers upon
a sheet of glass with the blotter next the glass, and hold the
papers on the glass by four rubber bands over their edges. A
drawing board having oil-cloth under the blotter may take the
place of the glass.

PAINTING SELF-TAUGHT 59

Make the drawing with the point of a brush wet enough to
take up a little color. Then with the side of the brush lay in the
masses of color. Use barely water enough to hold the color and
deposit it where it is wanted. Too much water will flow the
color outside its proper limits..

Keep the paper always wet enough to enable you to add more
color and to take off color with a dry blotter, or dry brush, or a
cloth. If the paper dries, spray clear water upon it with an
atomizer, and continue to perfect the drawing and the color
until a satisfactory effect is gained. When this is done allow the
paper to dry as you add the finishing touches of details, since
these need to be sharp in outline. This is the Dutch method and
is capable of splendid effects that are artistic and strong at the
same time. Do not use Chinese white or any body colors on such
drawings.

105. The Dry Method. — There are so many different ways
of using water-colors on paper that is dry or moistened by a
wash of water or of light color that I question whether I should
more than advise you to experiment until you find your own way.
A few explanations may, however, be helpful if you do not con-
sider them complete or binding, but simply the basis for the
practice that will develop your own method.

The early method for water-colors, like that for oils, was to
obtain the drawing and light and shade in some neutral color,
and then wash the needed color over this foundation, using trans-
parent colors.

The modern artist aims to secure effects as directly as possible,
and seldom employs the old method of colorless underpainting.

The best modern water-colors are those in which drawing,
light and shade, and color are all given at one painting, and the
nearer the modern artist comes to doing this at first touch, the
better he is pleased. Keep this fact in your mind, and gradually
you will evolve your own method that will be direct and artistic.

Some artists carry a light wash of color over the entire surface
of the paper, varying its strength and color as it proceeds, and
when this is dry placing other washes over the first until finally
the accents of dark are added with a fine pointed brush.

Another method is to place the washes one at a time in their
proper places, and allow each to dry as nearly as possible of its
desired full strength. This is a crisp direct method but apt to
produce lines of light if the washes do not meet, and lines of dark
if they overlap. You can improve upon this method by working
needed detail into each part before the wash dries, with a moist
brush and a little color, and you can leave a tiny space of white
paper between different colors as you apply them so they will

60 DRAWING AND PAINTING SELF-TAUGHT

not run together, and then, just before these colors are dry, you
can blend them slightly with a moist brush, thus avoiding the
hardness due to lines of white or lines of dark between the differ-
ent colors, v

If hard lines do come, they can be softened with water and a
soft brush, or sponge. A bath of clean water over the entire
sketch will help a result that is crude or outlined.

Let the white of the paper produce the high lights, and do not
use Chinese white or body color at all unless you use it in all
parts of the sketch.

I can not tell you how to represent any object, detail, or effect,
for this would mean formulas and recipes in place of observation
and truthful representation. Use your lenses until they fail to
improve the masses; thus you will find your own way, and do
your best work.

PAINTING IN OILS.

106. Materials. — Oil-colors come in tubes that are intended
to contain pigments of the right consistency. Color that is too
thick may be thinned with equal parts of turpentine and lin-
seed oil. Poppy oil dries slower than linseed oil and may be used
to retard the drying of the colors. Siccatif may be used to hasten
drying, but it is better for you to use at first simply the colors
as they come from the tubes.

The painting may be made upon paper, cardboard, canvas, or
wooden panels. The natural surface of all these is very absorbent
and most painters prefer to prepare the surface, so that the color
will not be absorbed too quickly. This may be done by a coat
of varnish, or paint, or of glue size and whiting. Some painters
prefer to work upon an absorbent surface which may be prepared
by thin glue size and whiting mixed to the right consistency to
apply evenly, and in a thin coat when the mixture is cold. This
is suitable for panels of cardboard or of wood. An absorbent
canvas may be made by tightly stretching the canvas over a
stretcher or any other surface, and then giving it a coat of thin
glue size. If thick glue is used the canvas will crack. When
the canvas is dry a coat of white lead paint thinned with turpen-
tine is applied. The canvas is ready for use when this paint is
dry. By mixing the white lead with linseed oil instead of tur-
pentine a non-absorbent canvas is secured, and this paint may be
•used upon wood or cardboard if desired. When wooden panels
are used they should have a coat of paint upon the back to keep
them from warping.

The cheapest material for the many quick sketches the student

PAINTING SELF-TAUGHT 61

must make is paper or cardboard of any thickness prepared as
explained above. You may make many of your first sketches
on the same panel or canvas by scraping off the paint with a
palette knife when the sketch is completed and then washing
the surface clean with a cloth and kerosene.

107. Use a White Ground. — The old masters painted upon
a pure white surface, and you should do the same, avoiding even
the natural surface of wood or cardboard, which will darken with
age. If you paint upon an old picture its colors will darken those
placed upon it, and in the same way any dark ground will strike
through. Therefore you should not save your paints by placing
them upon the panels or canvas you may have on hand for fu-
ture use.

Varnish is not white and therefore not suitable as a ground
for anything except practice sketches, and even these will be
better if made upon a pure white surface which aids you to keep
your work light and effective. Another objection to a varnished
surface is its smoothness; therefore avoid using varnish except
when you must prepare a panel for immediate use, and must
therefore use a varnish prepared with alcohol. Whiting sifted
upon this varnish before it is dry will improve the surface.

108. Monochrome. — The first work in oil-colors should be
in monochrome, using black and white or any dark brown
color as raw umber or Vandyke brown. In study of a cast hav-
ing warm reflected lights a little yellow ocher may be added to
these parts.

Try to cover all the canvas as quickly as possible so that you
may use the lenses as a test of values and masses, but remember
that good drawing and true values are more important than clever
technique, and so you should work over your first painting until
no mistakes exist in any of these points. If you make a sketch
that has fine qualities it may be well to keep it, even if it is not
perfect everywhere, and not risk losing the good qualities by
repainting; but most of the time it is better to repaint until
clever handling gives place to honest drawing and modeling,
unless all these qualities can be had at the same time.

109. Painting in Oil-Colors. — Many of the old masters
painted with black, white, and red until drawing and modeling
was perfected. When this ground was dry, they added the color
by thin glazes of transparent colors. Beautiful effects of light
and color are possible in this way, but you must not allow the
old masters' results to blind you to the beauties of the soft and
pearly tones of flesh in a natural light. The light and color in
many old pictures are not true to daylight effects unless also in-
fluenced by colored or strong reflected lights. You should strive

62 DRAWING AND PAINTING SELF-TAUGHT

to represent at first simply what you see by the light of any
window, — North, South, East or West. When able to do this,
you may study by firelight, or lamplight and daylight combined,
or by any artificial colored light.

110. You should mix your colors on your palette to give the
right color and value at one touch if possible, but when the lenses
reveal mistakes, you should add more color to the sketch until
it is corrected or until you have to scrape off all the color and
begin again.

111. You can change the colors or the values of a solidly
painted picture which is quite dry by glazing transparent colors
thinned with medium upon it, or by scumbling thin opaque
colors; but this should be the last resort to avoid scraping out
and repainting. Do not understand me to mean that you may
not secure good results by glazing, scumbling, hatching, and
stippling, for many painters do their best work in these ways,
and often they are the best painters.

112. The Masters Work Hardest. — Do not think the mas-
ters do their work without effort, for often they may have to
scrape out all the work of the preceding day and repaint, and
continue this process for many weeks before they obtain the
satisfactory result which looks as if done without any effort.

113. No Best Way. — There is no best method. One artist
of high standing never began to succeed till he painted upon the
wrong or unsized side of his canvas. Some artists prefer to work
upon an unsized surface which takes up the medium so quickly
that the paint must either be made very thin with spirits of
turpentine or be applied with a palette knife.

Occasionally an artist may adhere to the old method of cover-
ing the canvas with a thin wash of transparent brown darkened
in the shadows before painting solidly, but most painters who
begin with thin color prefer to use the color visible in nature,
since this hastens the effect and aids in the present effort to ex-
press the light and pearly color seen by the sensitive eye.

Some painters use a siccatif or drier, and others use slow
drying mediums. Varnish and oil and turpentine give a quick
drying medium occasionally used. Good results come whenever
an artist who sees truly and feels deeply is in earnest about his
work. This is the reward you have for the many years of hard
work that are necessary before you can do your very best.

114. Avoid Sharp Edges. — Always paint the object and
its background at the same time, and finish at one sitting, or
at least finish the drawing of the contour of the object. Nature's
outlines are seldom sharp, and if you do not paint object and
background at one sitting the edges are apt to be too hard.

Drawings by the Same
Freshman.

Entrance Examination
September.

Brush Drawing
March.

Brush Drawing, One Hour
April.

All Drawings were
Examinations.

ao Sept 28 ^A'hn,,

i Apr'/ 1 IS. rwi
Fig. 32. — Gain made in freshman year.

64 DRAWING AND PAINTING SELF-TAUGHT

You must vary the sharpness of the edges in all parts of the
painting. As in outline drawing there must be no rule or definite
plan for doing this, for it is a matter of feeling and artistic ex-
pression. In painting this variety is easier to obtain than in
outline, for in light and shade or color you can represent exactly
what is seen to a greater extent than is possible in an outline
drawing. The student should therefore aim to be truthful until
it is easy and natural to be so.

Outlines are often lost entirely in the shadows, and care must
be taken not to represent these outlines that are not seen. Some-
times the outlines are lost in the big masses of light. The out-
lines of cast shadows are always changing in sharpness.

In light and shade or color be careful not to draw outlines
around objects, for you never see them in nature. Objects appear
lighter or darker than what is behind them, and there is never a
continuous outline of light or of dark around any object. There
is a narrow shadow underneath an object that separates it from
the supporting object, but this is part of the shadow and not
found outside the shadow.

Generally an object is lighter than the background in'one part
and darker in another, and so the effect is continually changing
from light to dark and from sharp edges to blurred edges. You
must observe all these changes and represent them truthfully
but without exaggeration, for edges without variety of light and
dark and of sharpness and softness are fatal to truthful and artistic
painting. Uniformity of edge and forms that are outlined are,
however, permissible and necessary in decoration where design
and conventional beauty are most important and exactness of
visual appearance is to be avoided.

115. Vibration of Color. — The impressionists have greatly
extended the painter's power by proving the value of the laws
of color contrast in the effort to represent light and color. You
should study these laws, and in landscape painting at least, you
should experiment with spots of contrasting colors of the same
value. This method is especially helpful in representing a blue
sky, and in any subject it will give strength and refinement of
color. In still life and portrait work students should use blended
colors in flat tones that will produce the effect of nature in one
lens just as the subject reflects it in the other.

116. Forget the Actual Colors. — You should entirely forget
the color of the object and the colors of the pigments you are
mixing, and think simply of the warm and cold, the light and
dark of the effect, as seen upon the lenses. It will be easier to
do this if you always stand as far as possible from your easel.
If you are not one of a large class, place your easel a few feet

PAINTING SELF-TAUGHT 65

away from the model, observe the model from a distance, and then
walk up to the easel and paint from memory, until you need to
observe again.

117. Do not hesitate to add bright and pure pigments to
any part of your picture as may be needed to make this part
seem in one lens the same color that the subject appears in the
other. You can not represent snow with white paint, and you can
not at first produce the effect of flesh with the colors you think
it ought to appear. Until 3^ou rely on the lenses there is little
chance of your using the right colors or seeing more than the
actual facts of color. Use the lenses properly and always paint
with pure color, never using neutral mixtures until the two lenses
present the same masses of color. By this means you may save
a score of years of colorless results.

118. The Palette. — The best palette is made by placing
clear glass upon a sheet of white paper on the top of a small
table. The table is valuable not only to save you the labor of
holding the palette but to support it farther from the eye than
it can be held by the hand. This distance helps you to think
of the color you are mixing rather than of the separate pigments
in it.

119. You should always arrange the colors in the same way
on the palette but should try to avoid formulas for mixing tones
and depend instead upon the effect of the mixture as warm or
cold and light or dark. You can match values and colors in
this way much more quickly than by the use of formulas.

At the end of each sitting clean your brushes, first in kerosene
and then with soap and warm water.

120. The oil-colors put up for house painters' use in pound
cans are cheaper than tube colors and good enough for many
purposes when made by a reliable maker, and of an earthy nature.
You can test these colors as explained in Section 89. French zinc
white in pound cans is also satisfactory and half as expensive
as the color in tubes.

PAINTING IN PASTELS.

121. Pastels are made of color that is bound together in the
form of a crayon by gum tragacanth. Each crayon makes its
colored mark just as the white chalk crayon makes its mark.
It is evident that pastels can not be used on a smooth surface.

You can make your own pastels readily and cheaply by following
directions given in the book "Letters to a Painter" by Ostwald,
translated by Morse.

122. Special pastel cardboard and canvas with a fine sanded
surface is made, but any paper with a rough surface will answer.

Fig. 33. — From pencil painting by Anna M. Hathaway.

PAINTING SELF-TAUGHT 67

A sheet of tinted crayon paper makes a cheap substitute for
the special papers, while oatmeal paper such as paper-hangers
use is cheaper still, and good enough for quick sketches.

With pastels as with other mediums it is simply a matter of
getting the right color in the right place, but as pastels are not
as easy to mix as other colors, you may have a more extended
list of colors.

123. Pastels may be blended to produce any desired color
by rubbing two or more crayons over the spot where this color
is needed, and then blending the different colors together with
the hand. This result may be obtained by the impressionist's
method of separate strokes of the different colors placed beside
each other or one upon the other.

Pastels are permanent when made of pure and permanent
pigments, but the color is easily rubbed or shaken from the pic-
ture, and should be protected under glass, or by fixing with a
special fixatif for pastels.

In some ways pastels are easier than other colors for the be-
ginner. I have seen beginners produce really excellent results
in the first attempt with pastels (see Frontispiece). The chief
objection is that they are dirty, and the floor under your easel
must be covered with a cloth. It may be wise for you to experi-
ment with all the colored mediums, and then continue with pas-
tels, oils, or water-colors as you prefer.

124. Hundreds of tints, shades, and tones of colors are pre-
pared for you to select from. I would advise you to purchase
the large soft crayons 3^ inch in diameter and 2}^ inches long.
Buy the primary, secondary, and tertiary colors, with black,
white, and light and dark grays, both warm and cold. This
will give you fifteen crayons, and you may add tints and shades
and hues of the above colors if you find that you need them,
but the fewer you require the better.

125. Before using the colors make a few sketches in black
and white, with an intermediate neutral gray, to learn how to
blend the tones. Obtain the masses by placing a crayon flat on
the paper. Draw detail with the end of the crayon, which may
be sharpened if desired.

126. As with oils and water-colors you should use bright
pigments when the subject is light, and lower toned colors when
the subject is darker. Do not use neutral browns and grays
in any medium, but make all colors by mixing the primaries
or secondaries without fully neutralizing the result. You had
better err on the side of a little too much color than avoid cru-
dity by commonplace browns and neutral grays.

Do not fear to believe your eyes and represent what you see

68 DRAWING AND PAINTING SELF-TAUGHT

by the use of the lenses. Many artists have seen truly but have
been afraid to paint what they saw until some braver soul had
done the work and gained the reward of independence.

127. Choice of Subject. — Though the medium you use is
not important, it is important that your first subjects should
be selected so as to make it easy for you to study the point in
which you are most deficient. If you can not draw, you should
work in outline from boxes, furniture, and geometric forms,
in-doors and out-doors. If you wish to study light and shade,
select still life in which the objects are not too broken in color.
Objects of one color are best, for all the changes are due to light
and shade. In the same way, such still life subjects are the
best for first lessons in painting. Avoid all objects that are
covered with designs and those whose forms are complex. Fruits,
vegetables, and still life are the best subjects for the beginner
in color. When you are able to paint these well you will have
little difficulty with the figure or a landscape.

128. You should select still life that you can represent full
size. If you work in your own home you should place the sketch
beside the group and keep it there most of the time that you
spend on the drawing. At least, you should keep it beside the
group until the lenses prove you have the values and masses
correct. You should observe the appearance from the desired
distance, walk up to the drawing and work upon it until you
have done all that you remember. Then you should observe
again, and so continue until the drawing is complete except
possibly for a few finishing touches. These you may make if
you wish, with the drawing placed so that you can work and
observe at the same time.

129. First Painting Lesson. — The best subject for study in
values or color is a background and foreground when both are cov-
ered with paper or cloth of one flat color. In a painting the back-
ground is as necessary as the objects, and this subject that in-
volves no drawing will quickly prove how much the color and
value of any material are changed by the light that falls upon it.
At first glance you may see no difference between the color or
value of foreground and background, but when you hold one
lens so that it reflects the color of the background and the other
so that it reflects the color of the foreground, it is seldom that
you will not see a marked difference. You should try this prob-
lem from many different colors and materials until it is easy
for j'ou to see these relations truly. Then you should arrange
drapery in folds over background and foreground, and make
careful paintings of both form, light and shade, and color
effects.

Hmo

Drawings by the Same
Freshman.

Entrance Examination
September.

Brush Drawing, Two Hours
March.

Brush Drawing, One Hour

and a Quarter

April.

All Drawings were
Examinations.

Fig. 34. — Gain made in freshman year.

70 DRAWING AND PAINTING SELF-TAUGHT

130. Next place any colored object upon a background and
foreground without folds, and try to decide whether the light
or the shadow of the cloth is the warmer; and whether the light
side of the object is warmer or colder than the shadow side.
Study these relations by use of the lenses and then paint the
effects until the lenses prove that you see truly.

When able to determine light and dark, and warm and cold
colors for one object and its background, begin to study groups,
always using the lenses before painting and during painting,
and for a final criticism of the completed sketch.

131. When you can represent the group, you will readily
include that part of the room about the group. When able to
represent this subject you will not hesitate to try a landscape or
street scene. These latter are no more difficult than the interior,
and there is no reason why you should not study them before the
interior if you wish to.

132. You can try a portrait whenever you desire. Without
regard to the subject, all that you need to do is to reproduce the
colors and masses you see upon the lenses, and then add the
most important details visible without the use of the lenses.

133. The Palette. — I have not specified the pigments to use,
because this would do more harm than good. I do not wish
you to copy any one or accept any person's judgment without
trial. It is a simple matter to experiment with the colors that
are said to be permanent or nearly so, and thus decide your
own palette. Much depends on whether the colors are mixed
too much or with too many other colors. Permanent colors
may be spoiled by other colors, and colors not considered per-
manent may prove satisfactory if they are used quite directly
and not retouched.

134. Your selection of colors will be influenced by your eye
for color, and if it is sensitive you will be able to use pigments
that would produce crude effects in the hands of one whose color
sense is not keen.

It is wise for you to begin with subjects that can be represented
by low toned pigments of an earthy nature and gradually as
their need is felt add the brighter ones.

Try to remember that the stronger the artist the fewer the
pigments he uses, and some noted painters have placed only three
pigments with black and white on their palettes.

135. Choice of Medium. — Broadly, this becomes a question
of whether drawing or painting is the aim of the student. Of
course, you must draw when you paint, but it is easier to draw
with a firm and hard point than it is with the yielding point of a
brush. Therefore the old masters when they wanted an exact

PAINTING SELF-TA UGHT 7 1

drawing, used the point of a pencil, or a crayon, or even a pencil
made of pure silver. With such a sharp instrument you may
study the most minute changes in form. You should use such a
point for exact studies until you can draw quickly and perfectly
all the detail in a difficult subject, but you should not study
values or color effects with such a point unless the drawing be
very small.

136. When you wish to work in values you should use char-
coal or water-color monochrome, and avoid pen and ink and all
pencils or crayons.

In color study use pastels, water-colors or oils, as you prefer.

The methods of this book enable you to study color and values
while you are learning to draw. You will be wise to spend your
time first on drawing and then on painting, and to keep shifting
from one to the other as often as you meet with success in one
and failure in the other.

137. You should draw with the brush as well as the pencil
when you find you can draw correctly with the pencil, and you
should experiment with all the different mediums in common
use, including pen and ink and etching when you are able to draw
without tests and measures.

It should be your first aim to see outline correctly, and then
color correctly, and to practice with the different mediums until
you no more have to think laboriously of drawing, light and shade,
or color, as you work, than the pianist has to put labored thought
on his notes or his technique as he enthuses his audience.

138. Draw With the Brush. — It is a great mistake to make
a finished drawing as a basis for a painting to be made upon
the drawing. With such a drawing comes the fear that you
will lose it when you paint. To do the best brush work you must
be free from all fear. The fear of losing a drawing will produce
a hard and mechanical result, and generally a faulty one as well.

In water-color work a preliminary drawing will show through
transparent colors placed upon it, but even then careful drawing
of details in pencil will lessen the charm that comes from draw-
ing and painting at the same time with one touch of the brush.

Oil-colors or opaque water-colors hide the drawing completely,
and so it is wiser not to put much detail in any drawing made as
a basis for a painting. No matter how hard you try not to lose
the first drawing, you will do this unless you can draw and do
draw all the time with the brush. It is not only a waste of time
but an injury to the painting to do more than draw the most
important masses before you begin to paint.

Many painters draw with color only, but unless you draw
perfectly with the brush and compose with equal facility, it is

72 DRAWING AND PAINTING SELF-TAUGHT

wise for you to make a light pencil or charcoal sketch of action and
proportion, in order that you may obtain the best composition.

139. If you can not draw and paint at the same time, you
should study drawing alone with the pencil as explained in Chap-
ter II. Artists make many sketches and studies for their pictures
in which the detail is often most carefully drawn. When the
artist produces the final result after having made a series of
such sketches, he is sure of what he wants to do, and often is
able to draw and color perfectly at first touch.

140. Expect Poor Sketches. — Do not be discouraged when
the day's work seems thrown away, for this is not the case no
matter how bad the sketch may be. Work that varies from day
to day should encourage rather than discourage. The best
painters may work for weeks on the same portrait and fail
all this time, and then finally produce a masterpiece in one sit-
ting. If your work is not uneven in this way there is cause for
questioning whether it is wise to continue, for the best artists do
their best work at intervals and generally freely admit it. But
they do not cease trying and wait for the inspiration, and you
must follow their example. Work that will take first rank will
never come until you can do good work even if you are not in
the mood for the best.

You must work hard daily to perfect your vision and
your technique, for though the artistic beginner may do better
than he knows, he must never expect to do the best he is capable
of doing until he knows enough to redeem a bad start, and turn
it into a good result from his sure and exact knowledge that is
more science than the inspiration of art. In other words, the
greatest genius prepares himself by the hardest possible training,
extending over the whole of his life, for the inspired moments
that produce his masterpieces.

141. General Principles. — No rules for painting can be given
except that objects are seen through contrasts of simple masses
of light and of dark. The light masses are composed of surfaces
which receive direct light, and the dark surfaces are those which
are in shadow and visible only by reflected light.

In any subject there will be one light which is lighter than all
others, and one dark which is darker than all other darks. These
must be represented in every painting and kept in these relations.

The nearest of several equally light objects will appear the
lightest, and of several equally dark objects the nearest will
appear the darkest. Thus a light surface appears to darken as
it retreats, and a dark surface appears to lighten. This effect is
increased by contrast when the light and shadow sides of an
object are juxtaposed.

PAINTING SELF-TAUGHT 73

Surfaces toward the light lose much of their detail in the mass
of light. Those in the shadow lose much detail also. Thus a
small detail of dark in the mass of light is not a strong dark, and
a reflected light in the mass of shadow is not light but a dark that
does not break up the mass of shadow.

In painting the drawing is best gained by studying the forms of
the shadows and cast shadows instead of the outlines, therefore it
is important to draw very carefully the line that separates the
mass of shadow from the mass of light.

Cast shadows sharpen in outline and grow darker the nearer
they come to the parts that produce them.

The glitter light on any object changes its position as the
spectator moves. It is not the fixed point nearest the source
of the light, as is often claimed.

PIGMENTS.

Lead or Zinc White.* Ivory *or Blue Black.
Red 1 Light Red,* Venetian Red,* Indian Red.*

2 Alizarine Crimson, Harrison's Red, Vermilion.

3 Lacque Rose Dore, Pink Madder, Madder Lake.
Orange 1 Chrome Yellow Orange.

2 Orange Vermilion.

3 Cadmium Yellow Orange.

Yellow 1 Yellow Ocher,* Raw Sienna,* Chrome Yellow.

2 Chrome Yellow Light, Zinc Yellow. (Inexpensive.)

3 Aureolin, Lemon Yellow, Cadmium Yellow, Mars

Yellow.
Green 1 Permanent Green Dark.

2 Emerald Green. (Inexpensive.)

3 Cobalt Green, Vert Emeraude.
Blue 1 New Blue, Permanent Blue.

3 Cobalt Blue,* Cerulean Blue, French Ultramarine.
Brown 1 Burnt Sienna,* 3 Brown Madder.

The cheapest and darker colors are listed under 1. The lighter
(usually more expensive) colors under 2. The most expensive
under 3. Starred colors may be purchased in pound cans for
house-painters' use.

Do not mix Cadmium or Vermilion with Emerald Green.

Chapter IV.
MEMORY DRAWING.

142. Artists Draw from Memory. — Far more important
than ability to draw what is before the eye is the trained memory
that enables one to draw without a model to observe. "The
Training of the Memory in Art" by L. De Boisbaudran, written
in 1847, and translated by Luard, is an interesting book that
proves how carefully finished pictures may be made from memory.

The most noted artists have always worked from memory,
and some assert that this is the only way the best in art can be
produced; so you should realize that the power to draw from the
model is only a part of your education. The following from
Whistler's Ten O'Clock makes this clear.

143. "Nature contains the elements in color and form of all
pictures, as the keyboard contains the notes of all music.

■<^ "But the artist is born to pick and choose and group with science
these elements that the result may be beautiful. . . .

"To say to the painter that nature is to be taken as she is, is
to say to the player that he may sit on the piano.

"That nature is always right is an assertion artistically as
untrue as it is one whose truth is universally taken for granted.
Nature is very rarely right, to such an extent even that it might
almost be said that nature is usually wrong : that is to say the con-
dition of things that shall bring about the perfection of harmony
worthy a picture is rare and not common at all."

144. Corrections Necessary. — Memory results that are not
corrected train the memory for geometric facts, and aid in design
and composition but do not give the visual power the artist needs,
therefore you should make corrections easy by making your
first memory drawings on the Glass.

You may draw an object from memory after you have first
drawn it from observation, or you may study the appearance
until you can reproduce it clearly mentally with the eyes closed,
and then you may make the drawing without further observation
of the object. Either of these ways will give you the power you
need, provided you test the memory drawing carefully to discover
wherein it departs from the exact truth. Either way of making
a memory drawing may be used as you prefer, or you may use
both methods alternately.

MEMORY DRAWING 75

145. To draw from memory observe any object carefully
enough to notice all its proportions and angles, also the back-
ground spaces, and fix them in the mind so strongly that a clear
mental image of the appearance may be secured when the eyes
are closed. Then turn your back to the object and make the
drawing entirely from memory. Instead of turning around you
may hide the object behind any larger object or you may re-
move the object after having first drawn chalk lines around it or
placed thumb tacks at its corners. When the memory sketch
is as perfect as possible, test it after turning to face the object
or by uncovering or replacing the object that the drawing on the
Glass may be held to appear to cover the object.

146. Memory drawing is at present an important feature of
most public school courses in drawing. From the fourth grade
up pupils are asked to draw from memory such subjects as chil-
dren playing games out-doors, or people around a table, or about
an automobile or the entrance to a building. Such work may be
more interesting than boxes and other objects that make the
study of fundamental principles possible, but it is a mistake to
allow such figure compositions to take the place of the object
drawings that are possible of correction. Ingres said: "Before
allowing a pupil to draw from memory she should previously
have made a drawing mathematically correct, otherwise by re-
peating her faults they are engraved on the memory."

I would not prevent children from making free illustrative
drawings, for this work has much value; but it is wrong to give it
at the expense of that study from nature and objects that alone
can develop truthful vision and expression.

147. Cardboard Models. — Geometric forms are the best
subjects for memory drawings for the beginner, because it is
easy to define their position exactly, and because any mistakes
are seen the instant the drawing on the Glass is held up before
the object.

The first models should have only two dimensions, and you
may cut them from cardboard as follows: An equilateral tri-
angular card, edges 18" long. A square whose sides are 18". A
regular pentagon, and a regular hexagon, sides 10" long. If
you have not large cardboard, smaller models will answer, and
any objects at hand may be used after you have drawn these
simple forms.

148. Memory Without Observation. — As the power to draw
from memory is more valuable than that of drawing from the
model, so the power to draw from memory without any previous
observation of the model in the required position is still more
important, and is the foundation for the best success as an il-

Fig. 35. — From pencil drawing by Anna M. Hathaway.

Fig. 36. — Two-hour examinations made after four months' study by two of the
students whose entrance drawings are reproduced in Chapter VI.

78 DRAWING AND PAINTING SELF-TAUGHT

lustrator or a painter. After you have gained the power to ob-
serve any geometric or other form closely enough to draw the
form from memory, you should try to draw the object in some
imagined position at a new level or new angle. This may be at
a given level or angle determined by a slender stick of the length
of any edge which is placed at the described level and angle.
Observe this stick and draw it from observation, then represent
the object extending from this given edge. When the sketch is
complete, place the object in position with the described edge
coinciding with the stick, and then test the memory sketch on
the Glass.

149. The following problems are suggestions for such memory
exercises, and you should repeat and extend these problems
until you can thus draw any object in any described position.

In each and every problem be sure to draw from memory and
not from observation of the appearance you are to draw. When
the drawing on the Glass is complete, test it as already explained.

MEMORY EXERCISES.

(1.) Place a stick 18" long on the floor and draw a square
one side of which coincides with this stick.

(2.) Mark off the length of either side of a small rug on a
slender stick and place the stick in any position on the floor.
Draw the rug as it will appear when one edge coincides with the
stick.

(3.) The same as (1) except that the square is to be vertical
with its lower edge coinciding with the stick.

(4.) The same as (1) except that you are to represent a tri-
angular card when one edge coincides with the stick.

(5.) The same as (4) except that the triangle is to be vertical.

(6.) The same as (1) and (5) except that the card is the reg-
ular pentagon and the stick is 10" long.

(7.) The same as (1) and (5) except using the regular hex-
agonal card as model and a stick 10" long.

(8.) Cut a slender stick to the length of one edge of any box
or other object in the room. Place the stick anywhere on the
floor and then draw the object as it will appear when the chosen
edge coincides with the stick.

(9.) The same as (1) except that the card is inclined at an
angle of 45° with the floor.

(10.) The same as (4) except that the card is at an angle of 45°
with the floor.

(11.) The same as (1) except that the card is pentagonal and is
at 45° to the floor.

MEMORY DRAWING 79

(12.) The same as (1) except that the card is hexagonal and
is at 45° with the floor. The stick in (11) and (12) is to be 10"
long.

(13.) Cut from builders' pulp board, or better still from
3-ply paneling two circular disks 12" in diameter and screw them
at their centers to a stick 134" square and 23 J4" long. Cut another
stick 23" long and place it anywhere on the floor. Then draw
this model of the wheels as it will appear when the axle that
connects the disks is exactly over the stick on the floor.

Repeat this exercise with the stick at other angles on the floor,
and then at different levels and angles above the eye.

(14.) Cut a stick to fit between the two front legs of any chair,
and then draw the chair as it will appear when the positions of
the front legs are indicated by the ends of the stick, which you
have placed in any position on the floor. When making this
drawing be sure the chair is not placed at the angle of the stick,
so that you can draw from the object's appearance instead of
from memory.

(15.) Place a large cube or box on the floor, and then draw it
as it will appear after it has been lifted straight up in the air
until its lower surface is on the level of the eye.

Repeat this exercise, representing the object as it will appear
when its lower surface is 2 feet above the eye.

(16.) The same as (14) but the stick that locates the chair is
to be placed on some table or other surface that is above the
eye.

(17.) Place the box of (15) on the floor and then draw it as
it will appear after it has been revolved about one of its corners
on the floor, through an angle of 15°. Cut an angle of 15° from
cardboard, so the object may be turned exactly 15° after the
drawing on the Glass is completed.

(18.) The same as (17) but revolve the box 15° more in the
same direction.

(19.) The same as (18) but revolve the object 15° more.

(20.) Repeat the exercises of (17), (18) and (19), but revolve
the box 30° or 45° instead of 15°.

(21.) The same as (17) but use a chair as model, and continue
to draw the chair in imagined positions as described in (18),

(22.) Make many drawings of the disks of (13) in all possible
positions until you have proven that the long axis of the ellipse
always appears at right angles to the axis of the object on which
the circle is situated. See Fig. 39.

(23.) Procure a plaster cast of a skull, and draw it from mem-
ory at many different levels and angles.

BHHHnHHBHHHL

Fig. 3-7. — From drawing by Leonardo da Vinci (1452-1519).

c

Fig. 38. — From pencil drawing by Anna M. Hathaway.

82 DRAWING AND PAINTING SELF-TAUGHT

(24.) The same as (23), using a plaster cast of any antique
or modern head.

Many interesting exercises are explained in the book mentioned
in Section 142, and it will be easy for you to develop your power
of drawing from memory rapidly, as the problems given above
not only train the memory but the reason, and make the laws of
perspective the artist needs so simple that they may often be
understood without study of Chapter V.

150. When able to draw geometric forms from memory or
even before this time, you may draw any other object from mem-
ory, and especially should you draw human and animal forms
from memory. You may practice first from the casts in
museums and afterwards from subjects seen in your daily travels.

Fig. 39. — From photograph of cylinders.

Chapter V.
PERSPECTIVE THEORY.

151. Perspective. — The art of representing appearances on
any surface that may be supposed to be situated between the eye
and the objects. The simplest way to make a perspective is to
trace upon a window what may be seen when the eye is at a fixed
sight placed far enough in front of the window to permit the
hand to draw upon the window. In a true perspective thus
made every line on the glass will cover the edge it represents
when the eye is at the sight (station-point) .

152. Scientific Perspective. — A drawing made by the science
which enables the angle of every line of the perspective made by
tracing to be determined by its vanishing-point, and its length
to be measured by its measuring-point, so that an exact result
may be determined by theory on paper without tracing or ref-
erence to models.

153. Free-hand Perspective. — The artist objects to the dis-
tortions of perspective which change proportions and angles as
in Fig. 6, but when he draws exactly what he sees he finds that
straight lines in nature appear curved in his picture. Therefore
he combines the best features of the sketch he makes by eye and
the drawing made by theory, and calls the result a Free-hand
Perspective. It is true to the proportions seen, and since it rep-
resents parallel lines by straight lines that converge to one
point, it is as true in representing the facts of form and their
relations as is the scientific perspective that is false in proportions.

154. Vision Before Theory. — Follow Ruskin's advice and
avoid all theory until you can draw well by eye alone, and do not
think that theory will wisely do away with the labor involved
in drawing from nature.

Theory is necessary when nature can not be studied, but its
results are not as desirable as those due to vision, because the
more exact they are as theory the more they differ from what
the eye sees. Even if you can save time by using theory it will
pay to work longer and travel far to gain the inspiration of
nature and her visual proportions which a plane perspective
never gives.

155. Theory Aids Vision. — Theory aids both vision and
quick results, more when it is unconsciously applied than when

Fig. 40. — From pen and ink drawing by Anna M. Hathaway.

Fig. 41. — From pencil sketch by Anna M. Hathaway.

86 DRAWING AND PAINTING SELF-TAUGHT

its vanishing and measuring points are used, for the exact science
never has the charm of work done by relying on the eye for angles
and proportions. Science lacks this charm not only because
it distorts but because nature vibrates and the air causes even
the most sharp and rigid edges in nature to appear to tremble
and waver so much that a sharp even line in any free-hand draw-
ing is not as satisfactory or artistic as one that gives the impres-
sion of straightness without mechanical exactness.

156. Free-hand Perspective Before Scientific. — The artist
is most interested in the theory that relates to what he really
sees. This is the picture given on a plane that is at right angles
to the direction in which he sees an object. This perspective
is very different from the distortions of scientific plane perspec-
tive. It is called Free-hand Perspective or Model Drawing.

Not only is free-hand perspective better for the artist, illustra-
tor, and decorator, but for all general illustrations. Architects
often use it very largely in making their perspectives.

If your aim is simply to be able to draw and paint from nature,
it will not be necessary to master the full science, which is as
difficult to many as other branches of geometry. The theory
the artist needs is so simple that a few hours' study with the aid
of the Drawing Glass will make it clear.

157. Picture-Plane (PP.)- — This is the surface on which
the drawing is made whether glass, paper, or canvas. A true
picture or what the eye really sees is one which, if on glass or
transferred to glass, will exactly cover or hide from the eye all
the edges of the object which it represents, when it is held be-
tween the eye and the object in a direction perpendicular to the
line of sight.

Picture-Line (PL.). — The line in which the picture-plane rests
on the ground. It is sometimes called ground-line (GL.).

158. Station-Point (SP.).— The position of the eye that
sees the subject and represents it on the picture-plane by tracing,
or by observation, or by theory.

When the eye is at the SP., the lines of any exact perspective
cause the same image in the eye that those of the object behind
the picture-plane produce. The distortions of perspective are
not apparent then, and even the ellipses in Fig. 6 look as round
as the spheres. The SP. for Fig. 6 is about two inches in front
of the central sphere, hence the distortion is most unpleasant.
But if the picture is viewed from a small hole cut in a card and
held two inches in front of the middle sphere the ellipses will
appear circles.

Every drawing and painting has its station-point from which
it looks best. At a greater or less distance there is visible more

PERSPECTIVE THEORY 87

or less of the discrepancy between the drawing and the true
appearance that is evident in Fig. 6.

159. Horizon-Line (HL.). — This is often supposed to rep-
resent the horizon of the ocean, but it does not do this, for the
earth is curved, and we look downward to see the line in which
ocean and sky seem to meet. The horizon in perspective rep-
resents the line in which the ocean and sky would appear to meet
if the earth's surface were flat. The horizon in perspective is
the line in which the floor and ceiling will appear to meet if they
could be continued far enough. This line is on the exact level
of the eye, and a little above the horizon of the ocean. This
you can prove from the top of any high level wall or building near
the ocean, for its horizontal lines will appear to converge toward a
point that is noticeably above the horizon. By looking through
an engineer's transit when it is perfectly leveled, you will find
that the line that separates the sky and water appears below the
horizontal sight line of the transit. The higher the transit is
placed above the water the lower the horizon will come below the
center of the transit.

160. Center of Vision (C.V.). — The point where parallel
horizontal lines that run directly away from the eye appear to
meet or vanish is called the center of vision. It is always on the
level of the eye and exactly opposite the eye.

Vanishing-Point (VP.). — The point at which any system of
parallel retreating lines appears to vanish. It is in the horizon
for horizontal lines, and above or below the horizon for oblique
lines. It is seen by looking in the direction of the parallel lines,
and in a perspective diagram is found by drawing a line
from SP. parallel to the given system to intersect the picture-
plane.

Measuring-Point (MP.). — This is the VP. for a line that will
transfer any distance from the picture-plane where it may be
measured to scale, to a line that vanishes and on which the dis-
tance will appear less than its scale dimension. MPts. are used in
the scientific theory not explained in this book since the artist
seldom needs this theory.

Distance-Point (DP.).— This is the MP. for C.V. There are
two DPts. equally distant at right and left from C.V. Their use
will be explained.

161. Perspective Self-Taught. — Fig. 42 represents a student
testing a drawing on the Glass made from a skeleton cube. The
sides of this model were 4 feet long. Two opposite faces were di-
vided into sixteen squares by horizontal and vertical threads one
foot apart. This model makes the theory so easy that all students
who study from it understand the theory. You should provide

DRAWING AND PAINTING SELF-TAUGHT

such a model for your own use. One 2 feet square will be large
enough for individual use.

Obtain two perfect squares sawn from three-ply paneling
J/2 inch thick. Fasten these squares at each corner to sticks ]/g
inches square and long enough to make the outside height 24
inches. You may use brads or screws at each corner, also angle

Lj i mL

Fig. 42. — From photograph.

irons. Be sure the ends of the four corner sticks are cut perfectly
square. When fastened together obtain the sixteen equal squares
by threads stretched around the model and held in cuts made with
a sharp knife or chisel just six inches apart. Make these cuts in
all the edges of the opposite square disks, and also in the outer
edges of the four sticks that connect the disks. Use small tacks to
hold the threads in place, and to transfer the thread from one
level to another. Fine wire will be better than thread for a perma-
nent model.

Fig. 42 shows small circular pieces of paper which are fastened
at the intersections of the threads on two opposite sides of the
model. These serve as sights to enable you to place your eye
opposite any given point. Number these sights from 1 to 9,
placing the same number oh the opposite points.

A substitute for this model may be made from any large wooden
case by tacking sights on the inner surface of the bottom, and
threads to the outer edges of the case so they will cross each other
exactly opposite the sights that are tacked on the bottom.

Before drawing from this model you must make an adjustable
eyepiece or sight through which you may view the object from
one fixed point. Nail a strip of pine or white wood 6 feet long and
y% inch square to a base large enough to hold the rod upright. Then
cut a hole an inch or two in diameter in a piece of cardboard
and fasten the card to the rod with thumb tacks. To do this

PERSPECTIVE THEORY 89

place the model on a table or other support that will make it
easy for you to hold your eye on the level of the center of the
model, and then fasten the card to the upright rod so that the
card touches the front of the model, and the central sight 5 of
the model is exactly at the center of the opening cut in the card.
When thus adjusted place the rod about five feet in front of the

s

7 a

,HL

si

s

V 2

K

model and with the eyepiece directly in front of point 5 of the
model so that nearer point 5 covers the farther 5. When thus
adjusted study the appearance of the model through the card
until you can draw it from memory. Test this memory sketch
by holding the Glass vertical and parallel with the model. When
you secure a drawing which exactly covers the model viewed
from the cardboard sight, continue the lines of the drawing which
represent the four edges of the model that run from front to back.
You will find that these lines meet at point 5. This is the point
on the model that is exactly opposite your eye, and so this draw-
ing shows that the retreating lines of the object vanish at the
point that is opposite your eye.

When sure about this, transfer the drawing on the Glass to
paper by use of a T square and triangles, to any scale that will
make the drawing 2 or 3 inches square. See Fig. 43.

Now repeat this lesson, placing the cardboard sight twice as
far from the model as it was for the first drawing. When the
second drawing covers the model perfectly you will find that
the square that represents the farther side of the model is larger
in proportion to the nearer square than it was in the first drawing.
The greater the distance of the eye from the model the less dif-
ference there will be in the sizes of the squares, and the nearer
the eye to the model the greater the difference in the squares.

DRAWING AND PAINTING SELF-TAUGHT

When the distance of the eye from the model is known, there
is a way to measure the length of the retreating side which will
be explained later. In transferring this second drawing to paper
to the same scale as the first one, you may simply make it look
like the drawing on the Glass just as you determined the first
drawing on paper.

162. Avoid SP. Near a Large Subject. — Fig. 6 shows the
distortion inevitable when the visual angles are large. Your
eye must be two or three times the height of your subject away
from it to avoid unpleasant perspective. Often artists paint
when too near their subject. The queer perspective resulting

V

f> s

I

, H L

r-^^jL

will, however, seem true when you view the picture from the
same short distance of the painter's station-point. As distance
is needed to appreciate tone, color, and effect, it is important
to select a station-point that is not too near the subject.

163. The VP. Moves With the Eye.— Now place the sight
exactly opposite points 1 of the model and memorize this ap-
pearance. When the drawing on the Glass covers the object
perfectly, continue the lines that represent the retreating edges,
and they will meet at point 1, and thus illustrate how the VP.
(C.V.) moves as the eye moves, always being on the eye level and
exactly opposite the eye. Repeat this drawing on paper as you
have the others. See Fig. 44.

164. Theory Proven on Glass. — Now apply this theory by
making a drawing on the Glass instrumentally and to scale, rep-
resenting the model as it will appear when the eye is opposite
point 2 of the model. Place the eyepiece in line with sights 2
and make the drawing. Hold the Glass as before to see if the
drawing will cover the object. If the farther square is not made

DRAWING AND PAINTING SELF-TAUGHT

too small you may vary the distance of the eyepiece from the
model and finalty find a distance from which the drawing will
cover the object. I wish you to assume the distance of the eye,
and experiment until a SP. is found which causes the drawing to
agree with tjie appearance, in order that you may understand
how the appearance varies with the distance. Transfer this
drawing to paper as you have the others.

In the same way make drawings to scale on the Glass represent-
ing the model as it will appear when the eye is opposite points
3, 4, 6, 7, 8 and 9. Test each by observation through the eye-
piece, when placed exactly opposite the given pair of sights.
Thus you will prove how perfectly the theory enables you to
draw the object from any given position opposite its front face.
Transfer each drawing to paper and write neatly the statement
of each problem.

165. One-Point or Parallel Perspective. — The above draw-
ings are in one-point perspective, and prove the rule, that
all parallel lines that are horizontal, and that extend directly
away from you, appear to vanish at a point on the level of your
eye and exactly opposite your eye.

Two Objects. — Support a box 12" high 24" square two feet
above the cube form, and parallel with it, and make a drawing
of both objects as they appear from a point centrally placed and

HL.

8" above the top of the lower object. Observe from the eye-
piece and draw on the Glass and then test by holding the Glass
vertical and parallel with the front faces of the objects. Trans-
fer the correct drawing to paper by scale after observing
that the front faces are drawn of their real shapes. Fig. 46.

PERSPECTIVE THEORY 93

Now place the box on the surface that supports the cube,
with a space of 3 ft. between the two. Place the front face of the
box in line with that of the cube and draw both objects on the
Glass as they appear from a point midway between the two, and
1 ft. higher than the top of the cube. Fig. 47, In testing be
careful to hold the Glass vertical and parallel with the front faces
of the objects, for if you incline the Glass the vertical edges of
the objects will be represented by inclined lines.

Vertical lines below or above the eye appear to vanish, but
they are never so represented, for this would cause perspective
distortion when the drawing is not looked at from its proper
station-point.

It is impossible to represent the actual appearance of two or
more objects in one picture, for there can be but one C.V., and
only the object that is directly behind C.V. can be represented
in a perspective exactly as it appears.

Neither object is represented in Fig. 47 as it appears to the eye
that looks directly at it, for when more than one face of a cubical
form is seen all visible faces must be foreshortened. Both sets
of horizontal edges must then appear inclined to the eye that
looks at either object. A free-hand sketch of either would then
have two vanishing-points, but when both objects are to be
shown in one drawing there can be but one VP. Even one object
can not be represented as the eye sees it when it is below or above
the eye and has vertical edges.

166. Three Sides of a Room. — This subject demands the
use of one vertical picture-plane, for all parts of the room can not
be shown as they appear to the eye. The room is to be drawn
from a SPT4 ft. above the floor and 5 ft. to the right of the
left wall. Make the drawing on the Glass by observation from
the cardboard eyepiece set up in the given position and as far
as possible from the end of the room. After you have drawn
and tested the lines of floor and ceiling add those of the doors
and windows and then make the drawing to scale on paper.

Make another drawing when the eye is 3 ft. above the floor
and 6 ft. to the right of the left wall. Transfer this to paper.

Make a third drawing when the eye is 2 ft. below the ceiling
and 4 ft. to the left of the right wall. Test by use of a step ladder
and transfer the correct result to paper. The theory governing
the above drawings is illustrated by Fig. 48.

167. Room from Measurements. — Make a theoretical draw-
ing of a room 12 ft. high and 15 ft. wide as it appears from SP.
5 ft. above floor, and 5 ft. to right of left wall. A door 8 ft. high
is in each wall. A window 3 ft. above the floor to its base and 9
ft. to its top is in both the left wall and the end wall. A cube

DRAWING AND PAINTING SELF-TAUGHT

of 2 ft. is in left corner and a bookcase 9 ft. tall is in the right
corner of the room. A table 23^ ft. high is in the center of the
room. Do not copy or even look at Fig. 48 until your drawing
is complete. Then compare it with Fig. 48. I have not stated
the width of the doors, windows, bookcase or table or their exact
location, and so you may have measured correctly all the heights
I have given, and still find your drawing quite different in pro-
portions from Fig. 48.

the v/. Point of 45'

MC4SUKCS LINES THAT
GOTO CV IT 1$ MAMEO
DISTANCC POINT (&P)

PICTURE LINE

Fig. 48. — Height measurements.

You may begin this drawing on the plane of the farther end of
the room or on that of the nearest lines in the room which are
on the PP. In either case you must measure by the scale of the
plane you start with, and must realize that one foot on the dis-
tant end appears much shorter than one foot on the PP., while
between these two planes a foot can not be measured by the
scale used for either the PP. or the distant end and must there-
fore be determined by a perspective scale as drawn in the upper
left-hand corner of Fig. 48. Such a scale may be drawn and
applied to obtain the height of the table.

The height of the table may be best found by bisecting the
distance from the lower end of the table leg to HL., for HL.
is 5 ft. above the floor and the height of the table is 2J^ ft., which
is one half of 5.

In this way heights may be quickly found anywhere in the
picture. In Fig. 48 a vertical line at the right shows how the
heights of figures 6 ft. tall may be obtained by dividing the dis-

m

Fig. 49. — From pencil drawing by Anna M. Hathaway.

96 DRAWING AND PAINTING SELF-TAUGHT

tance from the floor to HL. into five equal parts, each represent-
ing one foot, and setting one part off above HL. to give the
height of the figure (5 + 1 = 6). When the eye is 5 ft. above the
floor any point on the floor is 5 ft. below HL., and so a scale for
height measurements may be quickly placed at any point on the
floor behind the PP. See the vertical near C.V.

A pole 10 or 15 ft. high from the surface of the ground upon
which the spectator stands with his eye 5 ft. above the ground
may be measured by taking the distance from the foot of the
pole to HL. wherever the pole may be placed, and setting it off
twice for 10 ft. or three times for 15 ft.

168. The Distance-Point. — Having assumed the scale of the
end of the room and drawn the cube in the corner, to draw the
table to harmonize with the cube you must remember that parallel
lines vanish at the same point. The diagonals of the base of the
cube and the square table must be parallel and at 45° to the
end of the room. The cube having been assumed, you may
continue the diagonal of its base that goes to the left, or the one
that goes to the right, until this diagonal intersects the horizon,
and thus determines the VP. of the parallel line the diagonal
of the table. When you have assumed the length of the side of
the table that is parallel to the PP., you will transfer this length
to the side that goes to C.V. by drawing the diagonal of the
table to the VP. in HL. located by the diagonal of the cube.

The VP. of 45° is thus the MP. for C.V., and hence is often
called the distance point (DP.). There are two DPts. in every
perspective; they are in the HL. equi-distant at right and left
of C.V. This distance is always equal to the distance of the
eye from PP.

The distance point is thus simply the VP. of 45° at either side of
C. V., which enables measurements by scale on the PP. to be trans-
ferred to lines that are perpendicular to the PP.

Theoretically the DP. may be at any distance from C.V., but
practically for pleasing results the DP. must be at least as far
from the C.V. as the total width of the perspective. At a less
distance perspective distortion is apparent, and increasingly so
as the distance of DP. from C.V. lessens.

169. Two-Point Perspective. — This is often called angular
perspective because it represents cubical forms at angles with
the PP. by use of two VPts. in HL., one at the left of C.V. and
the other at the right.

Place the model of Fig. 42 with its center on the eye level and
its horizontal edges at angles of 45° with the table. Fasten the
cardboard sight to the support so the center is on the level of
the center of the model, and set up the rod so that with the eye

PERSPECTIVE THEORY

at the sight the front upright of the model appears to cover the
upright at the rear. Then observe the model until you can draw
it from memory on the Glass. When you obtain a drawing that
covers the model perfectly place the Glass flat on a large table,
or platform, or on the floor and continue the lines of the drawing
that represent the edges at 45° until they meet. Do this with
chalk and a long straight edge or with a thread attached to a
thumb tack inserted at the VP. The four lines that extend to
the right will meet at one point on the level of the center of the
model, while the four that go to the left will meet at a point on
the level of the center of the model and as far to the left of C.V.
as the right-hand VP. is to the right of C.V. These two points
are the VPts. of 45° (the DPts.) of Fig. 48 which enable you
to measure distances on lines that vanish in C.V. They do not,
however, enable you to measure distances on the lines of the
model that are at 45°. To measure these edges at 45° you must

find the MPts. for the 45° VPts., but this involves the science
I wish you to avoid until you can draw as artists do by eye with-
out theory to aid you.

Transfer the correct sketch to paper instrumentally and make
it look like the model by eye, or by determining the proportions
of the sketch on the Glass. See Fig. 50.

Make and test as above another drawing of the model when
your eye is on the level of the top of the model, and then transfer
this result to paper to show that the VPts. will be equi-distant
from C.V. and on the level of the top of the, model.

Make another drawing with the SP. on the level of the
lower face of the model. Test this and transfer it to paper to
show that the VPts*. are equi-distant from the center of the
model and on the level of its base.

170. The Cube at 30° and 60°.— Turn the model until its
horizontal edges that extend to the left are at 30° to the front
edge of the table that supports the model. Those at the right will
then be at 60° to the table. Adjust the cardboard sight so it
is on the level of the center of the model and exactly opposite
the nearest upright and then memorize the appearance visible

DRAWING AND PAINTING SELF-TAUGHT

through the sight. When your drawing on the Glass will
cover the model perfectly place the Glass flat on a large drawing
board or on the floor and continue its lines as already explained
until they meet. The four that vanish to the left will meet in
one point on the level of the center of the model, and the four
that vanish to the right will meet at one point on the level of the
center of the model and at the right of C.V. This point will be
much nearer to C.V. than the left-hand VP. The right side of
the model appears much narrower than the left side. The pro-

portion is, however, not 1 to 2, and the left VP. of 30° is much
more than twice as far from C.V. as the VP. of 60° at the right.
Of course these VPts. and the widths can be measured exactly
by the science of perspective, but this we do not wish to study
at present, so you may transfer this sketch to paper, making it
of the proportions of the one on the Glass, and small enough for
the VPts. to come on the paper. Fig. 51.

As the cube is turned away from its position of 45° (Fig. 50)
one side makes an angle greater than 45° and the other side an
angle less than 45° with the PP. The VP. of the side at the
greater angle approaches C.V. while that of the side at the smaller
angle increases its distance from C.V. Continue to turn the
cube until one face is parallel to the PP. and the lines of this
face cease to vanish, while the VP. of the other face merges into
C.V. and is the only VP. of the drawing. Fig. 52 represents
objects at various angles with the PP.

171. Three-Point or Oblique Perspective. — Edges that are
not parallel with the PP. appear to vanish, and so when none
of the edges of a cube are parallel, it must be represented by
lines that vanish in three VPts. Such a drawing is said, to be
in oblique perspective, and not more than one of its VPts. can
be in the horizon. When one set of edges is horizontal with its
VP. in HL., another set will vanish above HL. and the third
set will vanish below HL. and also below the VP. that is above
H.L. Fig. 53.

The cube is not in oblique perspective when its edges are at
an angle with the ground and parallel with the PP., for in this

|jji

PW-

2 k

*i

Fig. 52. — First-year examinations.

DRAWING AND PAINTING SELF-TAUGHT

case there will be only one VP. (C.V.). The edges parallel with
PP. will be represented by parallel lines at their real angles
with the ground. Fig. 54.

172. Many VPts. in One Drawing. — Fig. 55 shows several
books at different angles with the PP. Fig. 56 is a reduced-

scale drawing that brings all the VPts. upon the page. There
might be other objects in oblique positions in the group, and
thus it is possible for every new object to add two or three VPts.
to the drawing. To determine these VPts. and their MPts. re-

. mfrixato

Fig. 55. — From photograph.

quires a thorough knowledge of descriptive geometry as a basis
for the study of the science of perspective. With such knowl-
edge it is possible to determine not only every VP. but to meas-
ure exactly every distance on even all the oblique lines. Cast
shadows by sunlight and lamplight and reflections in mirrors

PERSPECTIVE THEORY

may also be exactly determined, but this is the pure science the
artist seldom needs, and so the only explanations I will give re-
late to the simple problems of the artist.

173. Book in Oblique Perspective. — Place a book flat on a
table with its cover raised at any angle. Draw the book on the

ILL

vL

Glass and place the Glass, with the correct drawing, flat on a
table or the floor so that you may continue all its lines until they
vanish.

Retreating lines always vanish in the direction of their farther
ends. The visible side of an object must be nearer the eye than
the opposite parallel and invisible side, and so you will find the
lines of a correct sketch converging as they approach the invisible
surfaces of the object.

Fig. 57. — From photograph.

The horizontal lines of the ends of the book vanish at a point
in HL. The oblique lines will vanish at a point directly over
this VP. in HL., Fig. 57, but if you look at this book from the
opposite side the inclined lines will vanish at a point directly
under the VP. in HL.

DRAWING AND PAINTING SELF-TAUGHT

Fig. 58 is a reduced scale drawing that places the three VPts.
on the page.

174. Fig. 59 shows how the book will appear when its long
edges are parallel with the PP. The short edges that are hori-
zontal then vanish at C.V. while the inclined lines vanish just
over C.V.

175. Theory Injures the Beginner. — These drawings on the
Glass, if carefully made and studied, will make clear the practical
points that the artist needs, also all that the teacher of elementary

classes should teach. It is a serious mistake to begin with theory,
especially the scientific. It was many years before I proved this
to my own satisfaction by deferring theory each year a little
longer, and finally until practice without any theory had given
the entire class the power to draw by eye alone with professional
skill. I then found that the study of theory caused all students
to lose power in drawing from objects, and that it was a hard
struggle for many to regain reliance on vision. When the Gram-
mar School gives real visual power this difficulty may not con-
tinue, but as long as art students must begin visual training and
theory at the same time there is little chance of their gaining
real visual power quickly.

176. Theory Necessary for Teacher. — It is impossible to
teach advanced classes without finding some students who are
able to study theory and who insist on doing so. If a teacher is
not able to aid such students he must hurriedly begin to study
the science, or admit his ignorance. Therefore if you wish to teach
in High or advanced schools you are advised to finally study the

PERSPECTIVE THEORY

science of perspective, which you will find in many excellent
books.

Students who wish more on the subject of Free-hand Perspec-
tive Theory will find it in the book of this title by the author.

From photograph.

Chapter VI.

DRAWING NO MORE DIFFICULT THAN OTHER
SUBJECTS.

177. Grammar School Examinations. — The general belief
that drawing from nature is so difficult that it should not be
attempted in the Grammar Grades has not deterred occasional
teachers from securing splendid class results, even by the old
methods. Such instructors prove that real drawing can be taught
when the teacher possesses so great a love for art and for teaching
that the hard work involved is forgotten in the final success of
independent effort and real power.

Any one who has seen good class results gained without the
use of the Glass finds it easy to believe that the grade teacher
without special training or ability can obtain such results as
are shown by Figs. 60, 61, 62 and 63, if only the Glass is used
in the right way.

Fig. 60 shows the results of a half-dozen lessons on the Glass
in a class that had never before used the Glass. The seven pupils,
whose work before and after use of the Glass is shown, made the
greatest gain, but all the pupils gained in marked degree.

Fig. 61 reproduces the work of an entire class of Grade VI and
was done under the direction of a grade teacher. Many of these
drawings will seem very poor to those not familiar with public
school results, but in spite of their defects, this Grade VI work
is better than that of a large percentage of Art School students
just graduated from the High School. This will appear upon
study of Figs. 64 to 71 inclusive.

Figs. 62 and 63 reproduce the best and the poorest drawings
in examinations given by the grade teachers in Grades III and IV.
In these low grades as in the higher, 75% of the pupils succeed
as well with drawing as with other subjects, and thus prove that
there is no need of depriving young pupils of the pleasure and
profit which come from truthful study of drawing. Some pupils
do better in drawing than in other studies, and they need the
stimulus of this success to help them with more difficult subjects.

178. Art School Methods. — Those familiar with Art School
students expect the few to succeed and the majority to fail even
in the alphabet of art, therefore, the gain made by every student
in a class of thirty-four will be of interest.

M.H.

Mar.-I5.

D

BEFORE USING

Three hours' use of

Drawing Glass in

Grade VII. accounts for

the gain.

Drawings on same
level are by same pupil.
Those at left before use
of Glass, those at right
after Drawing on Glass
in place of paper for a
month.

Glass was not used for

right-hand drawing and

no aid was given by

teacher.

Glass was not used in
lower grades.

This method enables
average grade pupil to
excel graduates of high
school not thus taught.

A set supplies several

rooms, lasts a lifetime

and reduces bills for

paper and books.

Not an aid for picture
making but for the per-
fect vision that needs
no measures or tests.

i

,W C Apr -IS.

B.R

Apr-IS

J »\ I\f,r-I5

AFTER THREE HOURS' USE

EXAMINATION GRADE VI. ALL THE PAPERS.

r

1 U

i

r i i

Fig. 61. — The class of twenty-four pupils had used the Glass before this lesson,
also in lower grades. These drawings were made directly on paper, the Glasses
not having been distributed. A paper model was on each desk. No assist-
ance was given by drawing on the blackboard, or for students, or by telling
them what to draw. Erasers were not used. Though many drawings are
imperfect the set proves that object drawing can be taught in low grades.

EXAMINATION GRADE III.

Fig. 62. — The best and the poorest drawings are reproduced. They were drawn

directly on paper with the aid of the Glass used only as a finder, as shown in Fig.

75. The Cross crayons were not used. No assistance was given by drawing on the

blackboard, or on the papers, or by*pointing out mistakes.

EXAMINATION GRADE IV.

Fig. 63. — The best and the poorest drawings are reproduced above. They
were drawn directly on paper, the Glasses being used as finders. Each pupil
brought any kind of a small dipper and placed it at the back of the desk. No
assistance was given by drawing on the blackboard, or on paper, or by point-
ing out mistakes.

FRESHMAN EXAMINATIONS

September 28, before use.

q(l

u

#^PI

November 30, after use.

SM w

Fig. 64. — Gain made in nine weeks,

DRAWING AND PAINTING SELF-TAUGHT

When I first began to teach, I used to work a little upon my
students' drawings or at least suggest ways in which they could
be improved. At the end of the year I could show only the re-

H I

Seat 24 «

u

B

m

'Mj/mlQ-'s-

Fig. 65. — Freshman examinations. Those at the left were made on enter-
ing. Those at the right were made nine weeks later. The two lower
students were the best prepared.

suits of the few talented students, and knew that the work was
not a true index of their power.

Gradually, I found ways to substitute for my own vision that
of my students; and, finally, I refused not only to draw for them,

DRAWING NO MORE DIFFICULT THAN OTHER SUBJECTS 111

but to tell them how to
make corrections. Then the
results improved, and when
I called for many self-cor-
rected quick sketches in
place of a few long finished
efforts, the gain was so
marked that I began to ex-
hibit the work of every
student in the class.

179. Art School Exami-
nations.— Figs. 64 to 71
inclusive show the work of
a class of thirty-four, both
upon entering and nine
weeks later. In the case of
a few students who were not
present on September 28
or on November 30, other
drawings are shown. Fig.
64 compares the entrance
examination with one made
nine weeks later by five
pupils who were poorly pre-
pared. The drawings on the
same level are by the same
student.

Fig. 65 reproduces the
work of four other students.
The two that made the up-
per drawings were poorly
prepared, while those who
made the two lower were
the best students in the class.

All studied free-hand per-
spective ten hours each
week, used the Glass about
five hours per week, and
made quick sketches on
paper the rest of the time.
These they corrected by use
of the Glass and a thread
as explained in Section 54.
Figs. 66 to 70 inclusive show the work of the twenty-five students
who, upon entering, did neither the best nor the poorest work.

'Nrp

if/j

k.

v

\K

i

J^-st.

1 hr. j

Fig. 66. — The left-hand drawing under
each number was the entrance examina-
tion. The right-hand drawing was made
nine weeks later.

DRAWING AND PAINTING SELF-TAUGHT

It was impossible to find
drawings made on the same
date and in the same time
by all the students, but com-
parison of the two drawings
by each student will show
not merely better drawings
but the power to do more
in a given amount of time
after use of the Glass.

The faults in perspective
in the first seven drawings
are apparent at a glance.
Those in many of the other
entrance examinations are
not so easy to see. How-
ever, careful comparison of
these drawings will prove a
general and nearly equal
gain by all.

I regret that I can not re-
produce a set of five-minute
sketches made at the end of
the year from the same
chair and table upon which
forty - five minutes were
spent in September. If the
iive-minute sketches were
strong enough to reproduce,
they would show that nearly
all these students were able
to sketch true perspective
and true proportions in five
minutes, without the aid of
the Glass or any other test.

Fig. 71 shows the gain b}^
the student who made the
poorest drawing and who
at the end of the year did
none of the best work. The
middle sketch, however,
shows ability to give visual

proportions and perspective for four objects in ten minutes.
The street scene, though it was almost the first effort from such
a subject, shows some power to use the eyes out-of-doors. When

-The gain made in
by five students.

nine weeks

DRAWING NO MORE DIFFICULT THAN OTHER SUBJECTS 113

IMR

30 mi

Fig. 68. — The gain made in nine weeks
by five students.

without assistance, they
had given this power.

181. Vary Method and

were

compared with the entrance
drawing, much gain is ap-
parent in spite of defects.

180. Gain Without The-
ory.— The improvement
made in nine weeks was not
due to study of theory, for
this was not begun till
December when, for the first
time, the pupils were told
and made to prove that
parallel lines appear to van-
ish at a point. The gain
made was due equally to use
of the Glass and to artistic
methods of making quick
sketches on paper without
use of pencil measurements.

During the first month,
the sketches were done in
about five minutes and
often less time. In the
second month, the time
given was from two to ten
minutes. The third month
included fifteen-minute
sketches, and the sketches
of the fourth month took
from a half-hour to an hour
and a half. After February,
most students were able to
dispense with the Glass and
draw by eye alone with pro-
fessional accuracy.

These students were com-
pelled to work in outline
alone, for my teaching was
confined to this medium.
This long drill was tiresome
but when the students dis-
covered that they could
make interesting sketches
thankful for the training which

H hrs.

Medium. — There is no reason for

DRAWING AND PAINTING SELF-TAUGHT

confining beginners to out-
line or to any other medium,
for all are useful to the ar-
tist. Students should have
before them photographs of
sketches in all mediums and
methods done by the artists
of the past, and they should
be encouraged to make simi-
lar studies.

Students should, from the
start, study in outline, but
occasionally sketch in val-
ues or in color to increase
their interest in the outline
drill. They will understand
the necessity for this when
they find that right use of
the Painting Glass takes
away the difficulties in study
of values and colors to such
an extent that power to
paint depends principally
upon ability to draw.

First-year students can
do good work in outline,
light and shade, and in color
if they are willing at the
start to work faithfully upon
uninteresting subjects, even
as the student at the piano
labors long and hard upon
the necessary finger exer-
cises.

The question of what to
write to fill up the text of
this page and the next was
answered as it was asked
by a friend whom I had not
seen for years and who
wanted to examine the
Painting Glass

1 tm ft

/ l\ I

1 lui

\0ct,fi. 30 mm

If l» NoyJS 30 m. \

Fig. 69. — The gain made in nine weeks
by five students.

as soon as I told him about it. After short

study of outdoor and in-door effects through the lenses, he

DRAWING NO MORE DIFFICULT THAN OTHER SUBJECTS 115

i i'^f

lip

i 1

L

^ lUn.

-The gain made in nine weeks
by five students.

said that they showed him
more color than he had
ever seen before, and
he asked to have the Glass
for his own use, saying that
the painter who would not
find it helpful must have
queer ideals. This artist
was noted thirty years ago
for his fine color sense, and
I state this incident to en-
courage the student to rely
on the lenses as long as he
is in the student class.

As this painter left me
he said, "Be sure to make
your book emphasize the
fact that the problem of
becoming an artist is not
made easy by this Glass.
True vision at best is only
the means to command of
the alphabet that makes art
expression possible. The
student who has gained true
vision has taken only the
easiest step. After this step
is taken, to produce art he
must forget all rules, theo-
ries, and formulas, and go
to nature for the notes and
inspiration that may enable
him to produce a 'handsome
picture' that is his own in-
terpretation and his own
expression. To do this re-
quires the creative power
of the artist. It is beyond
that of the mere copyist,
and the power of the
schools to teach."

$eptie->s.

Sketches by the same freshman.

Examination, September 28.

■ oy-s-xa

Examination, November 30.

10-minute examination, June

i

30 mnhBteS..

■ ilpllli f

'June 1 1. if-j_

Half-hour examination, June.

Chapter VII.
DRAWING IN THE PUBLIC SCHOOLS.

182. The present condition of drawing in public and ele-
mentary schools was clearly stated in an address on "Blind Alleys"
delivered by Leslie W. Miller, in April, 1917, and printed in the
report of the eighth annual meeting of the Eastern Arts Associa-
tion. Lest it seem that I am making unwarranted statements I
wish to quote part of this address.

Blind Alleys. — " Now while the new educational schemes doubt-
less represent a great deal of admirable ingenuity, I am afraid
they are apt to contain just such seeming, or pretending, short
cuts which are only blind alleys after all. They undertake to in-
struct a pupil straight into the field of knowledge which he particu-
larly desires to explore and even hold out a more or less definite
promise to train him for the vocation which at the mature age
of fourteen he has decided to make his life work. . . .

"For my own part I feel very sure that it has been greatly
overdone already. Indeed, so much so that I sometimes wonder
whether the introduction of the kindergarten idea into our edu-
cational system has not done more harm than good. Of course,
it sounds very much like heresy to say anything against so
beneficent an institution as the Kindergarten. . . .

"But the methods which it relies on have sometimes been
taken too seriously by teachers and by being carried into fields
of activity for which they are not adapted, they have to a con-
siderable extent introduced an element of triviality into the work
of the grades, and have lowered the standards of such forms
of educational endeavor as are essentially disciplinary in
character.

"What are we to make of this epidemic of insanity that has
struck so many apparently well-meaning, sometimes fairly well-
trained artists. . . ?

"Strange things have been done in the name of art and she
herself has been held responsible for some pretty dark deeds at
one time and another, but certainly nothing like this has ever
happened to her before.

"Well, cubism, post-impressionism, futurism and what not,
are only so many blind alleys into which poor misguided art, in
search of short easy cuts instead of the perfectly well-known

118 DRAWING AND PAINTING SELF-TAUGHT

but arduous path which she has followed since the foundation of
the world, has wandered and got lost — that is all. . . .

"And now for the way out. . . . Now right tendencies in ele-
mentary education are concerned with fundamentals and with
fundamentals alone. The higher education may specialize all
it likes and as a matter of fact when it gets to be really high it
will of necessity specialize very narrowly but to allow the special-
izing methods of post-graduate university work to set the pace
for the work of the grades, or even for the ordinary high school,
is as fatal a mistake as the invasion of these same precincts by the
methods of the kindergarten has been shown to be.

183. "In all creative work — whether constructive or decorative
does not at all matter — the really fundamental thing and the one
that links it up with the whole field of general educational effort,
is the study of design. But design is drawing properly under-
stood and applied, only this and nothing more. All applications
and developments of this creative purpose, in whatever material
or by whatever process the ultimate expression is attained, de-
pend first and mainly upon ability to draw, and the true test
to be applied to all schemes to get variety and interest and im-
mediate profit into or out of our courses of study amounts in
the last analysis only to this, — is the pupil really learning to
draw and to understand and accomplish the things to which a
knowledge of drawing is the key? Now it is of no use to say that
all this is well recognized and may be taken for granted as in
operation practically everywhere already. We know very well
that it is not. On the contrary we all know only too well that
honest, solid work in drawing is very much at a discount; that
it has far too often given place to playing with colors and having
fun with make-believe art in the common schools, and that even
in the art schools themselves it is often woefully neglected and
sometimes openly discredited. I have heard its utility, and even
the need of teaching it at all, seriously questioned by the head
of one of the, potentially at least, greatest technical schools in
this country, on the ground that designs could be concocted
pretty well by means of tracings and photographs; of scissors
and paste-pots, etc. And that possibly the time and effort that
the effective study of drawing calls for could be more profitably
spent in other and easier ways. And I am sorry to say that
while this statement of the case by one in high authority is rather
exceptional in its shameless frankness, the attitude of mind which
it indicates is by no means an exceptional one, as most of us would
like to think it is. There are far too many evidences all around
us of the kind of searching for easy ways and short cuts for some-
thing that will pass muster in the way of attainment, that this

DRAWING IN THE PUBLIC SCHOOLS 119

kind of underestimate of disciplinary work implies. For drawing
means discipline, just as all real study does, whatever the field in
which it is employed; and when it ceases to have value as in-
tellectual discipline, it ceases to deserve the place which the pres-
ent generation of teachers, more strenuously than any of its
predecessors, has claimed for it. Let us get back, then, to the
fundamentals of drawing properly taught as that form of mental
discipline most directly related to creative effort and industrial
endeavor. Let the childish playthings, the amusing theories
and the easy substitutes for earnest study go. Do not delegate
to the kindergartener, to the half-baked psychologist, or to the
theorist in pure design, in color or in anything else the work
that can only be done by the man or woman who knows enough
about drawing to adequately recover the truth about things
as they are and has power to visualize in advance things as they
ought to be. Stick to that principle and the way out of our
present muddle will not be hard to find."

184. Walter Smith's Books. — The drawing books designed
by Professor Smith were intended to give every graduate train-
ing in the elements of Art, Design, Free-hand Drawing, Historic,
Ornament, Perspective, and Working Drawings. They were in
harmony with the general effort of that period to study the funda-
mentals instead of striving for interesting but superficial results.
Many text-books of that period involved hard work for both
teachers and pupils instead of that superficial pretence which,
in the words of the New York Board of College Entrance Exam-
iners, ''actually tended to degrade the taste and to blunt rather
than to sharpen the observation of the pupils." Section 266.

Though Professor Smith and other authors of drawing courses
refused to substitute superficial display for an honest founda-
tion, there were publishers eager to supply the demand for in-
teresting results not based on honest study or real power. New
drawing books were published frequently, but gradually their
sales decreased when it was found that their use did not give
graduates the power to draw. Then their publishers decided
that they had made a mistake in trying to teach object drawing
in the Grammar School, for they considered that only a few stu-
dents would become artists or use drawing in their life work.
The publishers claimed that the study of design should take the
place of object drawing because all students would benefit by
the study of art and design. This decision being made, the books
that were not in harmony with it were discarded and new ones
published which increased the time given to study of art and
design and decreased that given to object drawing and to in-
dustrial drawing.

Fig. 72. — From pencil sketch by Anna M. Hathaway.

DRAWING IN THE PUBLIC SCHOOLS 121

185. Publishers* Methods. — When the decision was reached
that object drawing would benefit only the few who would use
this power in their profession, every influence was exerted to
substitute for object drawing the stuoV of art and design. Com-
petent artists and teachers in the leading schools were forced to
give place to those who would support these new views of the
slight importance of free-hand drawing, and gradually the study
of this subject in the Grammar School has ceased. In the
High School drawing is now generally optional. When studied
at all the effort has often been more for display, than for the
basic principles prescribed by Walter Smith. As a result
of neglecting drawing for many years, even the talented students
who enter art schools are seldom able to represent simple objects
correctly.

This unfortunate result is due to the fact that the artist has
not been consulted or considered if his views favored the old-
fashioned drawing instead of the courses published in drawing
books one of which is to be used each term by each pupil in each
grade.

Though these books are not now as generally used as in former
years when publishers were influenced by possible profits more
than by such educators as Walter Smith, still the control of art
education to this time has been by the publishing firms who
have made it profitable for teachers to follow the plans of the
text-books, even if they have not bought them yearly for use in
the grades.

Text-book publishers are not only directly responsible for many
bad methods and inartistic copies, but also for the unwillingness
of other publishers to bring out competing books even when they
have been better. The sale of books and materials has not de-
pended upon their merit so much as it has on the ability of pub-
lishers to compete with the political methods of the firms that
have controlled public opinion.

186. Art School Control. — Text-book influences have been
considered paramount in many important schools In colleges
and normal schools methods have changed with those of the lead-
ing text-books. This may seem natural and right until it is real-
ized that the artist would substitute blank paper for most of
the pictorial copies and would seldom permit the study of art
theories to take the place of that training of eye and hand which
is given by drawing from objects and from nature.

187. No Fashions in Art. — There are few new and good
methods in drawing, for the masters of the past have furnished
the best that can be given. Artists have always drawn in one
way, and Michael Angelo recorded this way in a drawing lesson

122 DRAWING AND PAINTING SELF-TAUGHT

that can not be improved. This lesson is reproduced by Fig. 12
and represents a female figure by three drawings. The first one
shows the light touches of the blocking-in lines, and the next, a
little stronger, gives a little more detail. The upper drawing
is still more complete. In the original a fourth sketch is seen at
the left, so faint that it does not appear in the reproduction, and
this makes the lesson more complete by showing the delicate
way in which an artist begins his sketch with the faintest sug-
gestion possible to make of its principal masses. In spite of this
perfect lesson given so long ago and repeated by the practice of
all the masters, few graduates of the High School who enter an
Art School even know how to begin to make a sketch. Instead
of sketching lightly the action and proportion as all artists begin
to work, students generally begin with details and make mechani-
cal drawings, finishing the parts one at a time. Thus they prove
how the influence of the publishing firms has placed unwise
emphasis on theories and technique and been so harmful that
students who have never studied drawing gain much faster than
those who must overcome the influence of bad instruction in
the public schools before they can begin to profit by an artist's
instruction.

188. Control of Teachers.— College degrees are now given
for courses that do not involve more than from six to ten hours
of drawing and painting each week. A degree after such limited
studio practice can not mean much power as an artist except in
the case of artists who wish the degree for its assistance in gain-
ing a position and who enter able both to draw and to paint.
Unfortunately the drawing teacher has needed a degree or the
assistance of a text-book firm in obtaining a position to teach
even more than he has needed power to draw and paint from
nature.

189. Teachers Overworked. — Teachers of much native abil-
ity fail to overcome the bad training they received in schools
reflecting text-book influences, because they are subject to the
propaganda of the text-book firms even if not indebted to them
for their positions, and because their school duties often require
all the hours in a week not demanded by the need for food and
sleep. Teachers are often equally busy during the periods sup-
posed to be vacations. Thus overworked drawing teachers
have neither the time nor the strength to draw and paint, even
when such is their chief desire.

190. The French Method. — This does not happen in Paris,
where it is understood that only the teacher who is creating is
able to give the best instruction. It is the custom in Paris to
appoint as teachers of drawing only those who are actually pro-

* pr

ii- ■

Pig. 73. — Grade IX. Lead pencil drawings from stuffed specimens.

1^4 DRAWING AND PAINTING SELF-TAUGHT

ducing for at least two days each week. If we could be equally
sensible and pay the drawing teacher a living salary for teaching
not more than four days a week we would avoid the present
waste of time and money.

191. The artist is the best teacher for advanced students
largely because he has faith enough in himself to refuse to be
misdirected by foolish methods and popular fads, even when
they are presented by text-books and supported by the many
teachers who are influenced by publishers. The artist until
very recently has believed in study of nature and has insisted
on exact and truthful representations of nature without placing
emphasis on the medium or technique employed. Those artists
who have departed from the traditions of the masters so far as
to cease to value good drawing, construction, and color do not
aid the cause of art by teaching. On the contrary they injure
it by sanctioning the dishonest methods that have grown out of
the desire of the publishers to sell books, and the effort of teachers
who are not artists to furnish principles, steps, and methods
more complete than any directions for teaching that have been
left us by the great masters. The best painters have been busy
producing while teaching and writing has seldom been attempted
by those competent to express the artist's viewpoint.

192. Different Methods in Different Schools. — The work
in public schools is very different from that in art schools and
demands many and exact directions for securing truthful object
drawings. Probably no great painter could give these directions
successfully even if he could be induced to attempt it. There-
fore instruction in the public schools and in .elementary schools
must often be left to those who are not artists. The problem is
to give the needed directions in a way that shall not destroy the
individuality of students or teachers and thus cause the work to
become more mechanical than artistic. This problem can be
met only by confining the directions to matters that relate to
vision and subjects to be studied more than to steps, stages, and
the technique of the drawing.

If I had taught in the Grammar Grades I would have given
the same directions that my sister has given, for I have found an
occasional student in the art school who has needed to make a
tracing of an object in order to understand how to test a drawing
made on the Glass. In the Grammar School such students will
be found often, and so a few lessons in tracing are wise.

There is not time in the Grammar School for the long practice
needed to perfect vision without thought of theory, therefore
it is wise that each pupil should discover by use of the Glass
the essential theories as Miss Cross has directed.

DRAWING IN THE PUBLIC SCHOOLS 125

193. Full Pay for Four Days. — Directors and special teachers
of drawing not including mechanical drawing, should have two
days each week for study and studio practice and should receive
pay for full-time service. They should not be required to be pro-
fessionally engaged when not teaching, as this might prevent
the employment of some of the best teachers I have ever known
who have not cared to draw and paint, but have been successful
because they forced their pupils to make their own observations
and their own drawings, having proven that good results are
impossible as long as the pupils must rely in part on the teachers'
eyes or hands — born teachers if not born artists.

The class room and other duties of the teacher of drawing and
painting in the upper grades and the High and Technical Schools
should not be more than can be done in four school days. Art
can not be well taught until teachers have at least two days each
week free for studying, planning, visiting other schools, rest,
recreation, or art work as they may desire. Vacations and es-
pecially the summer one should be free for travel and art study.

On the basis of this claim it might be said that all teachers
would appreciate this allotment of time, but it is to be remem-
bered that the artist is the creative mind and time must be
allowed in which to create.

194. Nature is the best teacher, and art students who study
her honestly are better off with so little instruction that I refrain
from stating the time needed per week or month. The practice
of the best art schools should be considered the world over, and
all should realize that the inspiration and experience of the best
artist, if obtainable only at long intervals, are far more valuable
than instruction all day and every day that relates to technique
and finish more than to action, proportion, sentiment, color,
values and tone.

195. An art school student can work without supervision
when public school classes can not do this. It will be difficult
to quickly train the grade teachers so that they will need less
assistance from the special teacher of drawing, and it is a problem
how to arrange matters so that the drawing teacher's work may
be as fully completed in four days as it is now in five.

Possibly when the full benefit is gained from the use of the
Glass and new plans and courses, a day may be saved. If not,
some way must be found to relieve the drawing teacher. Drawing
can not be well taught by artists who are so overworked that
they are unhappy both mentally and physically and who have
no time in which they may draw and paint.

If the public understood that the French method, or some
other plan that frees the drawing teacher from full-time service

f^d,

Fig. 74. — Grade IX. Lead pencil drawings from stuffed specimens.

DRAWING IN THE PUBLIC SCHOOLS 127

is absolutely necessary if good instruction is to be given, the way
to do this would be speedily found. America's mistakes are due
to ignorance. But this nation will finally insist upon having all
that is best in education.

196. Requirements Repel Artists. — The artist refuses to
teach now because he can not practice his art, but if he could
give less than all his time to the public schools, young artists
of great ability would gladly teach, and the unsatisfactory condi-
tions now prevailing would give place to honest study and success-
ful results.

When the drawing teacher has been as free in America for a
few years as in Paris, art ideals, standards, and methods will
become sane and effective in all Normal Schools and Universities,
and an impetus will be given to art education that it has never
known. The inspiration of the artist and of nature study will
then supplant copies that are often mechanical, and theories
that fail to interest or profit young pupils as much as would their
discovery through personal experience in drawing from nature.

197. Education Involves Work. — The idea that students
should be interested and avoid work is not a recent one, and as
shown by the following extract from a book written in 1847*,
its results in the last century were identical with the inefficiency
of the graduates of today.

"Children ever eager for change readily clamour for new copies.
Certain teachers believe it increases their interest and enthusiasm
if they give in to their whims, but this is a serious and lamentable
mistake. For as his importunity has won him one new copy the
child soon clamours for another, and so recoiling from the slight-
est difficulty, he never really masters any of his tasks and will
always remain in his original state of ignorance."

198. Copies. — Much copying must be condemned when done
for exhibition in place of nature study, but a little copying is
desirable after some ability to do original work has been gained.
Copying straight and curved lines, geometric forms and historic
ornament in outline should be part of the work in every grade
until perfect results are gained.

After students have drawn from circles, a few copies of perfect
ellipses may be drawn. After drawing any solid, as the cube or
cylinder in many positions, copies of perfect outlines of the solid
may be made. A copy of a charcoal drawing, or one in water-
color monochrome may be made after several have been drawn
from nature. In the same way a copy in color may be reproduced
in color, after some study from nature in color.

It is better to omit all copies except those in outline unless

* "Training the Memory in Art," by L. De Boisbaudran.

128 DRAWING AND PAINTING SELF-TAUGHT

the reproductions are good, and from originals whose technique
is satisfactory. Many examples for copying are of the worst
possible technique, and before making use of printed copies they
should be proven good.

199. Apparent Technique is Bad. — The test of good tech-
nique is given by the question — does it make you think of nature
or of the medium, or its technique? A good picture tells its
story without any thought of its handling. Any picture which
causes you to think first of its technique is bad. To select prints
in values or color for copies use the lenses as explained in Sections
73 to 78, first setting up the group represented in the proper light.

It is not necessary to do this in the case of many prints which
at a glance make you realize that their technique was the chief
thought of the draftsman who made the original. Thus for many
years the fact that the line plate mUst be made from a drawing
composed of separate lines rather than of tones, has led to the
publishing of prints in which the lines of shading are so far apart
and so mechanical and false as to be absurd. The student should
avoid all questions of process and special technique until his
eyes are true for form, values, and color.

200. All Should Study Drawing. — It is a mistake to believe
that drawing will benefit only the few who are to use it profes-
sionally, for, more than any other study, it develops the percep-
tion and the reason and increases brain power, but of greater
value is the spiritual growth that comes from honest art study.
The artist feels that life has more beauty and happiness for him
than for the majority who are not able to see beauty or experi-
ence the pleasure of embodying thought and action in their
work. Education should relate not alone to the material but in
some degree at least to the spiritual, that we may avoid the
narrowness due to specializing and technical training. Every
student should have at least the elements of a liberal education,
and drawing should be as generally studied as is music.

Michael Angelo gave the reason why drawing should be studied
by all in the old-fashioned, honest way long superseded by dis-
honest methods, when he said: — "Nothing makes the soul so
pure, so religious, as the endeavor to create something perfect:
for God is perfection, and whoever strives for it strives for some-
thing that is God-like. True painting is only an image of God's
perfection, — a shadow of the pencil with which he paints, a melody,
a striving after harmony."

I do not disagree with the effort to teach Art and Design in
the Grammar School, but with the neglect of object drawing.
These subjects are of equal importance and can be studied with
equal value, for the Glass makes object drawing possible and in-

DRAWING IN THE PUBLIC SCHOOLS 129

teresting in even the lower grades. Design and drawing should
be studied together, for each aids the other, and art requires
design just as much as design must be based on drawing.

The Boston Art Club recently extended an invitation to New
England school-children of fourteen and under, to send in draw-
ings for an exhibition of children's work.

I was fortunate to see not only the six hundred accepted draw-
ings, but the much larger number not hung for lack of space.
The exhibition will be open while this book is in press and should
prove interesting to all teachers.

Some teachers do not believe in memory drawing or the study
of composition before one has learned to draw and paint. This
exhibition should cause reconsideration of such an opinion,
because many of the drawings show remarkable ability in design
and color, and are far better in these respects than much work
by art-school students and even by artists.

But the exhibition proves that today, to the pupils of our
schools, drawing does not mean study of appearances, for it is
difficult to find solitary examples that suggest that object draw-
ing is ever attempted. Probably 95% of these drawings illustrate
such subjects as the following taken at random from the drawings:
"Cinderella at the Ball," "Jack and Jill," "Mary had a little
lamb," etc.

Formerly drawing meant copying appearances with no attempt
at memory or illustrative work, and this exhibition represents
the natural reaction from a mechanical effort to represent ap-
pearances.

By usual methods there has not been time for pupils to develop
their memory and imagination, and also their eyes; therefore
instruction has been narrow. Rightly used the Glass enables
true vision and artistic expression to be developed at the same
time.

Memory drawings made on the Glass develop surprising power
to illustrate on paper without study of the model. Grade pupils
who follow the lessons of Chap. IX should be encouraged to use
all possible time in memory study on the Glass. The best students
may find time at the end of each exercise while the rest of the
class are trying to complete the work. But if time can be found,
extra lessons should be given the entire class on memory drawing
on the Glass.

Chapter VIII.
MODEL DRAWING IN THE GRADES.

Copyrighted by Evelyn F. Cross, Supervisor of Drawing, Stoneham, Mass.

201. Art School Methods Fail in Low Grades.— The failure
of the "Cross" Drawing Glass in many grade schools has made
me decide to publish these lessons. The Glass was first used
in Art Schools, and when adopted by public schools, it was nat^
ural to follow the methods which had produced such remarkable
results in Art Schools.

When I first used the Glass in Grammar Grades, I did not
dream that there was any way except the Art School method,
and I became so disgusted with the results that I gave up all
use of the Glass and could not be persuaded to try it again
for several years.

202. Finally I tried again and found that by use of models
on each desk, the upper grades could do good work. Now, after
several years of experiments, I am satisfied that I have found
a way to begin in the lower grades that will interest the pupils
and enable them to succeed.

Supervisors who have seen my classes at work have copied the
directions given to my grade teachers and have afterwards written
to say that these directions made drawing from objects so profit-
able that they should be printed for general use.

No course of study should be given teachers until it has first
been carefully worked out in the class-room. Theories are theo-
ries,— and children are children. Sometimes the theories and the
children can be brought together harmoniously, but more often
some change is required, and since the children cannot be changed,
the theories must be adapted to their minds.

I do not claim to have a course that will never need changes,
for several times in the past few years, I have thought that I
was ready to publish my plans, and then some experiment has
given me a new and better method, and I have waited to make
sure of details. I expect to change in the future, as in the past,
but I feel sure of the most important problems.

203. Teachers who use these lessons must not expect to avoid
all difficulties, for the children cannot help being awkward at
first, but those that persevere are sure to find the pupils interested

FOURTH GRADE PUPILS DRAWING

WORKING DIRECTLY ON PAPER

THE GLASS USED AS A FINDER ONLY

THE "CROSS" CRAYON NOT USED

Fig. 75. — From photograph.

From Dr. Charles W. Eliot, President Emeritus Harvard University.

Dear Mr. Cross : — Your Glass is a very simple and ingenious device for
training the eye to see with precision. It ought to be used in all the drawing
classes in the country; for it enables the pupil himself to prove how exact his
own observation of an object placed before him has been. It is not necessary
for the teacher to show the pupil that his work is exact or inexact. The pupil
himself can prove the quality of his own work; and so see how to correct it.
Your Glass helps him to tell with his pencil the matter-of-fact truth, and to
set down accurately what he sees with accuracy. Of course the delineation
of an object is only a part of drawing; but it is an essential part.

/ wish every superintendent of schools in the country could see for himself how
rapidly pupils — both in the grades and in the high school — that use your Glasses
advance in skill and in self-reliance.

As I am hoping that drawing is to have a much larger place in American
schools than it has ever had before, I naturally take strong interest in all means
of improving the teaching of drawing. Your Glass is plainly a great improve-
ment in teaching correct delineation of objects and perspective.

GRADE IV.

Drawn Directly On Paper.

Though these pupils are too young to draw on the
Glass and test by looking through the Glass at the
object, they can draw on paper. See Fig. 75.

All who see these busy
children happy in their
self-instruction, and in a
concentrated effort that
producesa wonderfully
successful class result, ad-
mit the great value of this
drawing in the Grammar
School.

A Fourth Grade Teacher
said — "My pupils want to
draw all the time and gain
concentration that aids in
other studies."

Fig. 76. — Such results come from the use of the Glass as a finder (as shown by
Fig. 75), the "Cross" crayon not being used.

MODEL DRAWING IN THE GRADES 133

in an unusual degree as soon as they discover that they are able
to criticise their own work.

204. Glass Saves Paper. — The supervisor who meets with ob-
jections as to the expense of providing schools with the Glasses
has only to state that the pupils work so much upon the Glass
that very little drawing paper is used for some time and that
the saving of expense for paper soon balances the cost of the
Glasses. It has, however, been my good fortune always to
work under school committees who, once convinced that the
success of my work depended upon the purchase of certain equip-
ment, were ready to provide the materials.

205. All Grades Begin in Same Way. — The lessons for the
higher grades can not be given to pupils not prepared for them
by several years' use of the Glass in lower grades or b}^ later
study of the lower grade lessons. This preparation must be
thorough, for a quick review will do little good. Perspective is
hard to understand and apply, even with the aid of the Glass.
Only conscientious effort and more time than is ordinarily given
to object drawing can render the Glass as helpful as we have
found it in Stoneham, where the teachers who have carried
out these experiments are conscientious workers and so faith-
ful in following directions that the success is as much theirs as
mine.

206. Success Demands Time. — A grade teacher unable to
follow directions carefully or unwilling to work long and hard
with models that do not make good exhibition subjects, will
fail with the Glass. Any supervisor should succeed, provided
she is allowed sufficient time for the subject, but failure is cer-
tain without the needed time.

Some supervisors are bound to meet with objections because
model drawing takes so much time. It has been my privilege to
work with superintendents who have had the vision to realize
that the removal of model drawing from the course of study
meant the removal of the very foundation of the art course and
who, therefore, were glad to permit plenty of time for experi-
ments with the Glass.

207. I am especially indebted to Mr. Arthur Webber,
who until recently has been superintendent of the Stoneham
Schools. My present superintendent, Mr. Frederick Porter, ex-
presses himself as follows: "I am much impressed with the new
method of teaching free-hand drawing which I have seen demon-
strated in your classes. The ability of the pupil to correct his own
errors renders it invaluable and the results are so uniformly good
in both higher and lower grades that I feel convinced that some-
time the "Cross" Glass must come to be recognized as the only

GRADE V. FROM OBJECTS.
Drawn directly on paper without use of the Glass.

"The Glass is going to be an enor-
mous help in making even the dullest
see. You have lightened the burden for
all drawing teachers." — H. B. Warren,
Harvard University.

11 It is the best aid to observation I have
seen, being direct, sensible and simple.
The results from its use are remark-
able."— C. Howard Walker, Director
School of Design, Architect, Boston.

"One could not believe such results
possible, unless he saw the actual work
both at the beginning of the term and
now. The Glass will be a missionary
to rural sections." — Charles E. Var-
ney, Supt. of Schools, Gray, Maine.

"After investigating carefully your
Drawing Glass, I have decided to intro-
duce it in the free-hand drawing classes
in this School. For a Drawing Teacher
not to use the 'Cross' Glass would be as
foolish as for a semi-blind man not to
wear glasses." "I went into a class last
evening and said to the instructor,
'Well, how does the Glass work?'
Tine/ said he. 'I will have to change
my course. They have learned more in
a week with the Glass than formerly they
did in a month.' " — F. F. Frederick,
Director of the Trenton School of Art.

MODEL DRAWING IN THE GRADES 135

sensible way of bringing before the pupil the principles of
perspective."

208. Tracing Starts Pupil. — When the Glass is used in Art
Schools, no tracing is permitted, but time is wasted unless some
tracing is allowed in public schools. The average public school
pupil has no idea as to what he is to look for while studying and
almost no knowledge of perspective. Thus a little time spent
in judicious tracing will open his eyes much more rapidly than
will the Art School method of drawing by sight on the Glass
with the "Cross" crayon, testing, correcting, etc. Without
this tracing, the grade pupil can not understand that a correct
drawing necessitates lines on the Glass that appear to cover
the edges of the object when the Glass is held in position for
testing. A little tracing at the beginning should be permitted,
but it should not continue after it is possible to work without
it.

209. Study on Glass. — In Art Schools the students are ready
to work on paper when they can make on the Glass a drawing
which will fit at first trial. The average public school pupil
can not be expected to make drawings which will perfectly cover
the object at first trial, but many pupils will succeed in making
their drawings nearly cover at first testing. This does not, how-
ever, prove that they are ready for work on paper, — in fact, my
pupils failed entirely when given the paper. I felt that there
must be some way to manage the change from Glass to paper,
and I tried using the Glass simply for study. I could not at
first see why it should make the difference, but I had taught
long enough to realize that things which make little difference to
adults make a world of difference to young people. It proved so
in this instance. The "Cross" crayons were not distributed,
for we did not wish to give a chance for tracing. The pupils
studied the models through the Glasses by laying on pencils
to test directions of lines and by "making believe" draw the
outlines on the Glass with lead pencils, and they readily put
the results of that study .upon paper.

210. As the weeks passed and proved how much better and
more quickly the pupils were drawing, I concluded to use the
Glass for study before attempting to draw on the Glass
with the "Cross" crayon. Preliminary study through the Glass
enables the pupil to avoid making many mistakes and is one of
the most helpful ways of using the Glass. This study is merely
what a student does when he draws "in the air." But studying
"in the air" by a young pupil is so inaccurate that it is without
value, — while study on the Glass or through the Glass con-
fines the pencil to one plane surface and serves to convince the

136 DRAWING AND PAINTING SELF-TAUGHT

pupil that drawing does not result from guesswork but from
knowing how to observe.

Since last fall, our fourth grade pupils have done more remarkable
work (considering their age) than those in more advanced grades.
At first I tried the method explained in Lesson 6, Grade IV, in
one room only. The results were so much better than any gained
in even Grade V or VI that I said, 'This must be an exceptional
class. I cannot expect it again." Then I tried it in a second
fourth grade. This also was an exceptional room. I kept on
trying it until every fourth grade in town had proved itself ex-
ceptional, and then decided that it was the new way of using the
Glass. One might conclude that the fourth grade teachers
were all exceptional, but the same teachers, under my super-
vision, had used the Glass differently and attained results only
fairly good.

211. Directions Avoid Failure. — It may seem unnecessary to
follow all the directions closely, but it is far wiser to do so, for
they are the result of several years of effort, in most of which
little or no success was gained, while these directions have resulted
in uniform success for all who have followed them carefully.
Sometimes a slight difference in use, so slight as to seem hardly
worthy of mention, will yet mean the difference between success
and failure. These differences mean more to the pupil of lower
grades than to those of higher grades. We often tell our classes
that learning to draw is simply learning to see, but all the time
we are well aware that teaching pupils to see is the most difficult
of all our problems and that the younger the pupil, the more
difficult has perspective proven, so that at times it has seemed
an impossible task. I have long felt helpless and hopele'ss con-
cerning model drawing. It is true that I always had a few talented
pupils who could learn to apply the principles of perspective,
which the others could not be induced to do.

212. My experience is by no means exceptional. For many
years drawing teachers have faithfully tried to teach object
drawing and failed completely except with the talented few.
Now, when so much attractive work is expected from the art
department, it is no wonder that directors believe that the
public cannot realize that correct drawings of the cube, prism,
and cylinder are worthy of admiration. They make no show,
and it takes so long to obtain the drawings that there is not
enough time to produce also the showy subjects which appeal
to the fancy of the spectator.

213. The drawing teacher has thus been forced to neglect.
the fundamentals and omit object drawing, first from the lower
grades, then from the higher grades, until now so little real draw-

t-

Fig. 78. — From sketch by Anna M. Hathaway.

138 DRAWING AND PAINTING SELF-TAUGHT

ing is taught in many places that when demands for posters and
other decorative work are made, it is necessary either to avoid
subjects that involve perspective or to assist pupils to an extent
that renders the results more the work of the teacher than of the
pupils. Only a few months ago a supervisor of an important
city came to me in despair and said, "I don't know what to do.
I begin to think I must give up teaching. I do not have time to
teach principles and my pupils are so poorly prepared for the
show work which I am forced to give them that they are unable
to do anything without altogether too much assistance from me."

214. Art and other educators recognize that a most impor-
tant factor in art study is that training of the judgment which
gives keen vision and ability to do accurate work of any kind.
Model and object drawing does more to further this end than any
other subject included in the drawing course. This fact is quite
generally recognized now, and so the drawing teacher must be
interested in a method which promises successful class results
with model drawing, even in the lower grades of public schools,
for, as is well known, it has been considered unwise, if not im-
possible, to expect class results in this subject below the High
School.

In addition to the exercises I have planned, I would suggest
that all the students try to reproduce from memory the drawings
which they have correctly made on the Glass. The objects
should be removed while making these drawings and replaced
that the completed work may be tested.

NATURE DRAWING.

Since the Glass is as useful in nature drawing as for study
of perspective, it will be well to give a few general directions.

215. Trace Leaves. — Begin with single large leaves, e.g.
lilac, plantain, syringa, maple, oak, etc. Place the leaf straight
ahead at the farther part of pupil's desk and with midrib parallel
with short edges of desk. Pupil look with one eye toward center
of leaf and place Glass in position for tracing and as near leaf as
possible without hiding leaf by lower side of frame. Trace line
on Glass with "Cross" crayon to cover midrib and stem of leaf
and then trace outline of leaf, — all the time looking back to see
if the first line traced still covers, for if either the Glass or the
eye is moved the tracing will not be a true picture.

The foreshortening is so great a surprise that the pupils are at
once interested. After tracing has been completed, place the
leaf behind the tracing so that differences may be better observed.

216. Study Through Glass. — When several tracings of leaves

MODEL DRAWING IN THE GRADES 139

have been made, pupils may study through Glass and draw on
paper or study through Glass and draw by sight on Glass with
"Cross" crayon. At first draw simply the mid-vein and stem of
the leaf (so placed that mid-vein is parallel with short edges of
desk), then hold Glass in position for testing and see if this is
correct. Also study outlines of leaf through Glass, "making be-
lieve" draw by lead pencil tracing. Next draw by sight on Glass
with "Cross" crayon and when outline is completed, hold up Glass
and look through it at leaf to see if lines can be made to cover out-
line of leaf. If not, note errors, lay Glass down and correct, test
again, etc.

217. When ready for work on paper, study leaf through
Glass b}r "making believe" draw its outline with lead pencil.
After having thus felt the way around on Glass, feel the way
around on paper and finally sketch with lead pencil.

218. Sprays. — When able to draw single leaves of simple
shapes, more difficult leaves may be studied and later sprays of
simple leaves and finally more difficult sprays.

The Glass thus used has been a wonderful help and has enabled
most of the pupils in a class to make good drawings. Before
such use of the Glass, the majority persisted in making "plans"
of leaves and were helpless to draw a leaf placed in a peculiar
position. Now, the greater number of drawings show foreshorten-
ing, and pupils seldom ask how to represent unusual positions.
If they do not know at first glance, they understand how to
study and discover for themselves. Teachers are enthusiastic
in the use of the Glass for nature study and often attempt and
succeed with more difficult subjects than I have given in my
outlines.

When the pupils discover that the pictures are really pleasing
and that they can teach themselves to produce them, they are
delighted to draw appearances instead of facts.

219. Foreshortening. — A supervisor who visited our classes
questioned the pupils of a sixth grade about the drawings, which
were uniformly shorter than the models. He picked up a model,
measured it and then measured the drawing and asked why the
drawing was so much shorter than the model. A pupil replied
at once, "Because of foreshortening."

"Foreshortening," said the supervisor, with a puzzled expression.
"What in the world is that? I know that shortening is some-
thing put into bread. Is it anything like that?"

"No," replied the boy. "Shortening is something you put into
bread to make it taste good and foreshortening is something you
put into drawings to make them look good."

Was there ever a better definition! And we firmly believe

Fig. 79.— By Anna M. Hathaway. Pencils used, H., F., 3B, 6B.

MODEL DRAWING IN THE GRADES

that the mission of the "Cross" Glass is to give the average pupil
ability to make a drawing "look good/' — an ability which will
sometime make drawing the simplest, practical, universal lan-
guage.

Grade VIII. Brush drawings.

Chapter IX.

LESSONS FOR GRADED SCHOOLS.*

GRADE IV.
THE FIRST LESSONS ON THE GLASS.

Lesson 1. Pupils learn to look with only one eye.
Pupils learn to aim a pencil at point on blackboard.
Pupil learns to aim a pencil at point on his own desk.
Pupils learn to follow with pencil point in the air, a straight
line on blackboard. (Teacher use pointer as guide.)

Lesson 2. Pupils mark a point (shown by an x) in center of
paper 6" x 9". Place paper at back of desk. Look through
Glass at this point. Practice in sighting or aiming at and cover-
ing this point with point of a lead pencil placed on the Glass.
Look with one eye and then with the other eye. Sit high and then
sit low and note how the position of pencil point on Glass changes
in order to cover the point on paper.

Lesson 3. Practice in following curved line on board. Teacher
guide pointer slowly around a circle and pupils follow pointer by
drawing in air with pencil.

Pupil lay a circular card (5)^" diam.) straight ahead at far-
ther part of desk. Hold Glass in position, look through
Oit at circle and then trace circle with "Cross" crayon.
Several attempts will be necessary to obtain an accurate
tracing.
Lesson 4. Pupil trace with "Cross" crayon a circular card
(33^" diam.) placed on the end of a cylinder made by rolling up
a strip of paper 5%" x 12". The card should fit the top closely
and a second card of same diameter should be cut for
CZ> the bottom. A few experiments will determine how much
lap to allow. After tracing the top circle on the Glass
O with "Cross" crayon, remove the top, also the central
part of the model, but leave the lower circle. Then trace
lower circle and compare tracings of top and bottom.

Bring out idea that the lower the circle, the wider it appears
from front to back.

Lesson 5. Trace with "Cross" crayon the entire cylinder
made as described above. Note that lower circle appears the

* Copyrighted by Evelyn F. Cross.

Fig. 80.— By Anna M. Hathaway. Pencils used, H., 2B, 3B, 6B.

144 DRAWING AND PAINTING SELF-TAUGHT

wider ellipse. Pupils see all the circle at the top and only part
of the lower one and so think the lower ellipse is not as deep as
the upper. A knitting needle laid across the Glass horizontally
and seeming to extend from the lowest point in the left vertical
to the lowest point in the right vertical will convince them of
the appearance. Sometimes it is necessary to use this needle
even when tracing, as pupils refuse to believe their eyes and insist
on drawing the lower ellipse not deep enough.

Lesson 6. First lesson in studying through the Glass. Do
not distribute " Cross' ' crayons.

The same cylinder vertical at the back of desk. Study vertical
side lines by placing two pencils on Glass. The convergence of
these verticals will seldom be noticed. Say nothing about it
unless some pupil speaks of it. Then explain that if convergence
is shown, the drawing will look like a tumbler instead of the
cylinder, and thus vertical edges must always be shown by verti-
cal lines. Explain that the lines do really appear to come together
and that this is the only time that we do not draw exactly what
we see when representing a single object.

Study top of cylinder by tracing on Glass with lead pencil the
curve of upper circle. Study bottom by tracing with lead pencil.

This "feeling the way around" the contour is a wonderful help.
As there is no drawing on the Glass, there is no tracing that can
be copied. If pupils trace and copy the tracing, they do not
think, and such use of the Glass is worthless.

The few tracings needed at the start should, however, be followed
with much study and close observation, or the power of seeing
truly will never be gained.

Lesson 7. First Lesson on Paper-
Pupils study through Glass (see Lesson 6). After study of
model as a whole, study top circle by "feeling way around" on
Glass. Then feel way around on paper, and after this, sketch
lightly on paper the top ellipse. Carefully study side lines by
use of knitting needle (see L. 5), then sketch lightly. Then
study and sketch lightly bottom of cylinder.

To test drawing, place pencil horizontal across Glass and
measure the width of model. Place this width on drawing. Place
pencil flat on Glass, parallel with sides of frame, and set off height
of model. Compare with height of drawing. Sometimes in first
lessons in Grade 4, it may be well to have pupils measure height
and width on Glass and transfer to paper before drawing. Such
aid is allowable for young children, but after a few lessons, they
can draw first and then measure.

Lessons 8, 9, 10 and 11. — All kinds of interesting models
based on the cylinder.

LESSONS FOR GRADED SCHOOLS 145

The models need not be alike, for it is better for pupils to use
their own objects and bring tin cans, tumblers, flower
pots, tin dishes with handles, powder cans, ink fillers,
all kinds of bells, vases, cups, mugs, etc. These ob-
jects will answer for several lessons, as pupils may ex-
change models. In this way models for each student
are readily supplied. No attempt at finish except neat-
ness and a soft gray line.

Pupils of Grade IV. should make many drawings on paper
so that they may understand how to draw any object based on
the cylinder or slight variations of this form.

This may seem a hard problem for Grade 4, but the suggestions
given make it possible.

GRADE V.

Lesson 1. Practice on use of Glass.

Practice looking with one eye.

Practice in covering ruler held vertically at front of room.
Pupils use ruler or pencil at arm's length and measure upon it.
Repeat when pupil holds the ruler nearer his eye. Note different
distances taken to cover the ruler at front of the room. Cover
and measure other and longer edges in room, as an edge of a pic-
ture, or top of door or blackboard.

Place a bit of paper at back of pupil's desk and aim at it with
ruler. Aim first without Glass, then with Glass in position for
looking through it at the paper. Aim carefully at paper and see
where ruler strikes Glass. Aim with right eye, then with left
eye. Sit high and aim. Sit low and aim. Note that ruler strikes
Glass at a different point each time the position of eye is changed.

Explain carefully correct use of Glass. Show need for keeping
eye in one position when drawing or tracing, by making two
tracings of a pupil's head, the first from one fixed point being the
good picture, and the other an absurdity produced by moving
the eye while tracing the head.

Lesson 2. Place pencil in groove at back of desk. Place
thumbs on Glass to cover ends of pencil. (Glass can be held
in position with the fingers.) Place pencil on Glass to cover
pencil behind Glass. Place pencil on desk parallel with short
edge of desk. Hold a pencil against Glass to cover the pencil
on desk. Note difference in length of the pencil on desk and the
part of pencil (on the Glass) that covers it.

(a) Study last position when eye is in line with pencil.

(b) Study last position when eye is at right of pencil.

(c) Study last position when eye is at left of pencil.

Fig. 81. — From pencil drawing by Anna M. riathaway.

LESSONS FOR GRADED SCHOOLS 147

If new pencils of same length are used, this study will be most
successful.

Place square card (7%") at back of desk and place pencils
on Glass to cover front and rear edges of card. Study foreshorten-
ing. Same experiment with oblong (5J^" x 8"), first when its
long edges are parallel with long edges of desk, and then when
the short edges are parallel. (Glass may be held with short edge
on desk for last position.) Study foreshortening and explain
common examples.

Lesson 3. Convergence. — Square card, 8". Place pencils

on glass to cover side edges of card

/ \ / | 1 \ and note convergence. Study three

positions. First, eye looking toward
center, then in line with right edge of card, and last in line with
left edge.

Same experiments with oblong 53^" x 8".

Same experiments with square 4j/£".

Lesson 4. Tracing. — Teacher draw line on blackboard.
Class follow teacher's pointer with lead pencil as she starts at
top and goes slowly downward. Other lines then followed. Con-
tinue "drawing in air" by following pointer around the sides
of a large square drawn on blackboard.

Place square of 7%" straight ahead at back of desk. Look
through Glass at it and trace with "Cross" crayon on Glass: —
first, when looking toward center; second, when eye is in line
with right side, and third when in line with left side. In the last
two positions, one side of square will be covered by one edge of
the frame.

In similar manner trace with "Cross" crayon an oblong 53^" x 8".

Lesson 5. Trace with "Cross" crayon cube 2%". Trace
when only two faces are seen. Note foreshortening of

Qtop, also of. front face and convergence of edges of top.
Erase tracing and study .cube through Glass without
tracing. Place two pencils horizontally across Glass to
cover nearer and farther edges of top face and note that distance
between pencils is the distance that top appears from front to back.
Place two pencils across Glass to cover upper and lower edges
of front vertical face. Note that distance between pencils is
apparent height of front face.

Place two pencils on Glass parallel to side edges of frame and
so that they cover the nearer ends of two side edges of top face.
Move pencils together at the top until they cover side edges and
note their convergence.

Lesson 6. Drawing by sight on Glass with "Cross" crayon.
Draw cube with two faces visible.

I

I

r:^m

i

Fig. 82. — Brush drawings from nature. Grade VI.

LESSONS FOR GRADED SCHOOLS 149

220. Before drawing by sight it is necessary for most pupils
to study through the Glass. The laying on of pencils to cover
edges, even the tracing of outlines with a lead pencil is permitted.
It should be remembered, however, that there is a great difference
between lead pencil tracing on the Glass and tracing with
" Cross" crayon. The latter makes an actual outline, and if
the pupils trace thus on the Glass before drawing by sight,
they will simply erase the tracing and draw it again by memory
without any thought whatever, or they will make sure of leaving
faint outlines though pretending to erase and so get rid of the ne-
cessity of even memory work. The lead pencil tracing teaches
them to think, and as it leaves no line on the Glass, is the best pos-
sible way of studying. All study through the Glass done as an
aid to the drawing by sight on Glass with "Cross" crayon should
be done at one time and before drawing even one line with crayon.
The pupils should simply hold up Glass and do all such studying
in a few minutes and then lay Glass down and keep it flat on desk
while drawing with crayon by sight. The study through the
Glass as done in connection with the first drawing on paper
permits study of one line at a time. The various ways of using
the Glass tend to make it possible sometime to do wholly
without it.

221. Art School students should draw on the Glass when
it is held in the hand at right angles to line of vision, but young
pupils must place it flat on the desk with the white card behind
Glass. When drawing is finished, lay crayon down and hold
Glass in position for testing and look through Glass at cube.
See if Glass can be held so that the drawing will cover the edges
of cube. If not, note mistakes, lay Glass down and correct.
Look through Glass again, note mistakes and correct as before,
and so continue until all lines can be made to cover.

No tracing for corrections should be permitted when drawing
by sight.

Lesson 7. Square Prism, 2^" x 23^" x 5", two faces visible.
Draw by sight with "Cross" crayon on Glass. Proceed as
in case of cube, L. 6, the prism being upright.

The prism, lying down, only two faces visible. Two

positions, the first on desk and the second on three or

four books. Draw by sight on Glass. When testing,

Glass should rest on desk or on the pile of books.

Lesson 8. On Paper. Do not distribute crayons. Study

cube, 2 faces visible, through Glass. Place pencils on glass to

cover edges, etc., etc.

Place drawing paper so that when Glass is in position for
study, the lower edge of frame can rest on farther edge of paper

150 DRAWING AND PAINTING SELF-TAUGHT

to hold it. Pupils "feel way" around on Glass with lead pencil,
then "feel way" around on paper. Sketch lightly on paper with
pencil of medium grade. Place pencil across Glass and set off
on pencil the width of cube. Compare this with drawing. Place
pencil upright on Glass and measure on it the height of cube.
Compare with drawing. Place two pencils on Glass to measure
convergence of top edges. Compare with drawing and correct
same. Erase mistakes and finish in soft gray lines.

Lesson 9. Square Prism on Paper. Do not distribute "Cross"
crayons.

Two positions, — first, upright with two faces visible, and sec-
ond, lying down with two faces visible.

Proceed as in L. 8.

Draw square plinth 4" x 4" x \y%" on paper, two faces visible.

Lesson 10. Boxes on Paper.

Proceed as in L. 8. Do not give out crayons.

Other subjects of a more interesting nature should
I \ now be studied. Vegetables and fruits make good
I • I subjects. Cylindrical objects should be reviewed.
Each pupil must have a model on his own desk. Pupils
may draw on Glass by sight with "Cross" crayon before they
draw on paper.

GRADE VI.

Lesson 1. Tracing. — The Cube, three faces visible.
Place cube so that the two side faces appear of equal width.
Sit so as to look with one eye toward center of cube. Hold a
string, weighted by eraser, as a plumb-line to appear to pass
through corner G and the edge A B. Fig. 84.

Trace cube on Glass with "Cross" crayon. Constantly refer
-£ to first line traced to see that it covers the edge.

c^^Tp^^E Study tracing to understand why the cube ap-
^^y^^ pears thus,
j 2 A . Each pupil draw on Glass a line connecting D

j>L Jf and F. Note its horizontal direction and that

^\^^ the bottom edges slant upward at equal angles.
Fig B84 Measure on straight strip of paper (ruler is useless)
the distance from middle vertical to D and com-
pare with distance to F. Note that distances are equal and
therefore side faces 1 and 2 appear alike.

B. Measure middle vertical A B of tracing on strip of paper.
Compare with actual length of edge A B in model. A B appears
shorter than its real length because, being below the eye, it is
seen obliquely and foreshortened.

C. Measure length of C D in tracing and compare with A B.

Fig. 83. — Grade VI. Brush drawings from nature.

152 DRAWING AND PAINTING SELF-TAUGHT

Explain that C D appears shorter than A B because it is farther
away. Measure E F and see that it is the same length as C D
because the same distance from the eye.

D. Draw diagonals in the tracing of the top face and note
that C and E are in the same horizontal line, while A and G are
in the same vertical line. Measure A O of vertical diagonal and
compare with 0 G. Explain that A 0 appears longer because
nearer eye.

E. Place ruler on B F of tracing and continue it. Also continue
A E and C G. These lines come nearer together in the tracing
as they recede. Make same experiments with left side lines of
tracing.

If any pupils notice the convergence of the lines of tracing
that represent the vertical edges of cube, explain why this is
not represented. (See L. 6, Grade IV.)

Lesson 2. Tracing Square Prism on Glass. Place prism
so that two side faces appear equal. Trace with "Cross" crayon.
Study tracing as explained in L. 1.

Lesson 3. Study Cube through Glass. Draw on paper.

Do not distribute "Cross" crayons.

Place cube at farther part of desk with three faces visible,
the two side ones equally foreshortened.

Place paper so that when Glass is in position for looking through
it at model, the frame will rest on farther edge of paper to keep
it in position.

Pupils look through Glass at model and study angle of lower
edges. Place two pencils on Glass to cover these edges. Place
knitting needle across Glass from D to F (Fig. 84). Note
how far up needle seems to cut middle vertical. Sketch on paper
with lead pencil the lower edges of cube. Also the middle vertical.
Place knitting needle upon drawing to see if lines are at correct
angle. Measure on Glass the apparent length of middle vertical
and compare with drawing.

Place two pencils on Glass to cover edges A E and B F. Note
convergence. Sketch on paper and test. Lay two pencils on
Glass to cover A C and B D. Note convergence. Sketch on
paper and test.

Sketch side verticals, then measure width of side faces both
on Glass and in drawing.

Place pencils on Glass to cover edges of top, A E and C G,
also A C and G E. Sketch on paper. Draw horizontal and verti-
cal diagonals of top. Place knitting needle on Glass to form
horizontal diagonal of top and compare with drawing.

A O appears a trifle longer than G 0 through the Glass and
should be so in the drawing.

Fig. 86. — Brush drawings from nature. Grade VIII.

154 DRAWING AND PAINTING SELF-TAUGHT

After all corrections are made, erase and finish in soft, gray
lines.

Lesson 4. Study through Glass. Draw on paper. Crayons
not distributed.

Place square prism 2}^" x 5" upright, at back of desk, with
three faces visible, the side faces equally.

Proceed as in preceding lesson.

Lesson 5. Study through Glass. Draw on paper. The
square plinth (4" x 4" x 1JH$")> three faces visible, the two side
faces showing equally. Proceed as in L. 3.

Lesson 6. Draw on Glass by Sight with "Cross" crayon.

Place cube at back of desk on pile of books, with three faces
visible, the two side faces equally.

Draw on Glass directly without tracing. Study through Glass,
if necessary. Place Glass flat on desk with cardboard behind
Glass. When completed hold Glass in position for testing, rest-
ing it on books instead of on desk, and see if all lines of drawing
can be made to cover at one time the edges of the cube. Note
errors, lay Glass down, and correct, etc., etc.

Lesson 7. Draw on Glass by Sight.

The square prism upright with three faces visible as in L. 6.
Place on books.

Lesson 8. Draw on Glass by Sight.

The square plinth when placed on books, three faces visible.
Lesson 9. Draw on Paper. Boxes.
Do not distribute crayons. Use objects based on square
prism or plinth.

Lesson 10. Draw on Paper. Cube.

Three faces visible, two sides equally. Draw on paper, if
possible without study through Glass.

Lesson 11. On Paper. Square Prism.

In same way as in L. 10.

Lesson 12. On Paper. Object (not a box) based on
Square Prism.

If possible, without study through Glass before drawing.
222. It may seem as if I have planned an unnecessary
amount of drawing on Glass by sight, but I have tried
less and failed. Drawing by sight on Glass and then testing seems
to be the only way to obtain an exact drawing. This trains
pupils' judgment so that finally they can work readily on paper.
Some will wonder why they begin by studying through the Glass
and drawing on paper, and then leave the paper to draw by sight
with "Cross" crayon on the Glass. It is because, in the lower
grades, it is easier for them to make an approximately correct
drawing on paper after study through the Glass, than it is to

LESSONS FOR GRADED SCHOOLS 155

make and test an exact drawing on the Glass. Making the ap-
proximate drawing on paper prepares the way for the absolute
accuracy demanded by the drawing on Glass.

Some may think the study through the Glass not es-
sential and that pupils should work directly on paper. I have
found much time wasted when difficult subjects are thus tried by
young pupils. The study through the Glass makes real the
truth that the drawing on paper must be exactly as model looks
through the Glass. High School and advanced pupils may not
need this study, but after ten years of teaching without it and one
year with it, my teachers are convinced that studying first through
the Glass makes subjects possible that have hitherto been con-
sidered impossible. I believe that, when all my classes have
from the beginning been trained as these lessons suggest, the
final results will be much better than those now attained.

GRADE VII.

Lesson 1. Tracing Cube.

Place cube so right side appears narrower
J^~——~-r. E than left and trace on Glass with "Cross" crayon.
~+~~—fZ Look with one eye directly toward center of

l ! 2 cube. If position of model is correct, a plumb-

line held to appear to cover corner G will in-
tersect line A C. Fig. 85.

While tracing, refer to first line traced to see
Fig. 85. ^hat ft s^[\\ covers. Study tracing.

A. Pupil draw on Glass horizontal line through F and note
that it cuts left vertical C D above D. When the sides are at
unequal angles, D and F will not be in horizontal line.

When the angles of D B and B F are unequal, the sides 1 and 2
will appear unequal. Measure with strip of paper on horizon-
tal line througri F the width of right side and compare this
width with that of left side. Note that the narrower face has the
greater angle (B F).

B. Measure middle vertical A B of tracing and compare A B
in tracing with A B in cube. Note that appearance is shorter than
real length because below the level of eye.

C. Measure C D in tracing and compare with A B. Bring
out idea that C D is farther away than middle vertical and there-
fore appears shorter. Measure E F and compare with C D.
Note that E F is a trifle shorter because farther back.

D. Place rulers on three lines of tracing that converge to
the left. Note convergence. Place rulers on three lines that
converge at right.

Fig. 87. — Grade IX. From mounted specimens.

LESSONS FOR GRADED SCHOOLS 157

Lesson 2. Tracing Square Prism.

Place object so that the side faces appear of unequal width.
Trace on Glass with "Cross" crayon and study tracing as ex-
plained in preceding lesson.

Lesson 3. Study through Glass. Draw on Paper. Do not
distribute crayons.

Place cube on desk so that three faces are seen, the right ap-
pearing narrower than the left. Fig. 85.

Place paper so that when Glass is in position for studying
model, the frame may rest on paper to hold it in place.

Pupils look through Glass at cube, study angles of lower edges
and place two pencils on Glass to cover these edges. Place knit-
ting needle horizontally across Glass through F. Note where
needle seems to cut middle vertical and the left vertical.

Sketch middle vertical line of drawing. Measure its apparent
length on Glass and compare with real length and with the
drawing.

Place two pencils on Glass to cover edges A E and B F. Note
convergence and sketch on paper.

Place two pencils on Glass to cover edges A C and B D. Note
convergence and sketch on paper.

Draw side verticals and then measure width of each side face
and compare with the sketch on paper.

Place pencils on Glass to cover edges of top A E and C G and
then to cover A C and G E. Sketch on paper, correct and finish
with soft, gray line.

Lesson 4. Study through Glass. Draw on Paper.

Place square prism upright, at back of desk, with two sides
showing unequally.

Proceed as in preceding lesson and do not trace at all.

Lesson 5. Study through Glass. Draw on Paper.

Place square plinth at back of desk with its sides showing un-
equally.

Proceed as with cube, L. 3.

Lesson 6. Draw Cube on Glass by Sight.

If necessary, study first through Glass (see Lesson 6, Grade V.).

Place on books at back of desk and with side faces showing
unequally.

Draw on Glass with "Cross" crayon. Have Glass flat on desk
with the cover behind it. Do not trace.

When completed, hold Glass in position for testing, resting it on
the books instead of on the desk. Look through it at cube to see
if all lines of drawing can be made to cover at one time all edges
of the cube. Note mistakes and lay Glass down and correct.
Look through again and test and correct, but not by tracing.

158 DRAWING AND PAINTING SELF-TAUGHT

Lesson 7. Square Prism. On Glass by Sight.

Place prism upright on books at back of desk, with side faces
unequally seen. Place higher than cube in L. 6.

Proceed as in last lesson.

Lesson 8. Square Plinth. On Glass by Sight. Follow di-
rections for cube, Lesson 6.

Lesson 9. Box based on square prism or plinth. Place as in
L. 6. If possible do all needed studying through Glass first,
then draw on paper. No tracing. Finish in soft, gray lines.

Lesson 10. Small Child's Rubber.

Place at back of desk and trace with "Cross" crayon. Erase

tracing and turn rubber in opposite direction. Studjr

^^^) through Glass. Feel way around with lead pencil on

Glass. Sketch by sight with "Cross" crayon on the

Glass while Glass has cover behind it and is flat on desk. Test

by looking through. Note errors and lay Glass down and correct.

Lesson 11. Exchange Rubbers. Draw on Paper.

Study through Glass and sketch on paper with lead pencil.
While sketching, hold Glass in position for study so that sketch-
ing and studying may be carried on together. Place thin knitting
needle on Glass horizontally and vertically to cover important
points and note where needle cuts the contour. Feel waj^ around
on Glass with lead pencil to get the directions. Compare out-
lines of rubber with edges of frame. Measure height and width
on the Glass. Finish with a little shading. c^>

Lesson 12. Any interesting object. On Paper. ^Bk.

Proceed as in last lesson. f i(

Lesson 13. Etc., etc. Other interesting subjects in- ^^
eluding groups msiy be tried if desired as explained in Grade VIII.

USE OF SPIRIT-LEVEL.

223. Although pupils may not be able to draw from difficult
models that are far from the Glass, it is possible to begin to
study models not on their own desks so that in Grade VIII more
difficult models may be studied at a distance.

When studying from models and testing appearances, the Glass
must always be held at right angles to a line from the eye to the
model. When an object is below eye, the Glass will incline back-
ward as in Fig. 8. When object is above eye, the Glass will incline4
forward. When object is on level of eye, Glass will be held vertical.

When using the level the Glass should be held with the level
in the top side of the frame. Hold it in both hands and slowly
move one hand up or down, as may be needed, to make the bubble
stay in the center of opening.

LESSONS FOR GRADED SCHOOLS 159

Pupil can study a distant edge by placing pencil on Glass to
appear to cover it or by tracing on Glass with "Cross" crayon.

Have pupils use spirit-level to prove the following principles: —

Horizontal retreating lines below eye appear to incline upward.
Horizontal retreating lines above eye appear to incline down-
ward. Horizontal retreating lines on the eye level appear hori-
zontal.

Pupils can do this work without interfering with one another
if they do not all try to study the same lines at the same time,
or if this is desired, when one pupil remains seated and the next
studies while standing, and so on to the end of the row.

Lesson 14. Testing angles of lines above eye.

Testing angles of lines below eye.

Testing angles of lines at eye level.

Study directions of edges with reference to edges of frame by
placing pencils on Glass to cover edges and by tracing with
"Cross" crayon lines on Glass to cover edges.

Lesson 15. Similar problems to those in the last lesson.

Lesson 16. Draw by Sight on Glass long, distant lines of room.
Test by looking through Glass. Note mistakes, lay Glass down
and correct. Test again and draw again, etc.

Lesson 17. Same as 16.

GRADE VIII.

Lesson 1. Cylinder and Cube grouped.

Place at back of desk so that two faces only of cube are, seen.

□ Study through Glass as already described. Cover edges
with pencils. Hold up plumb-line to locate points with
f=\ reference to opposite outline. Place knitting needle
L— ' horizontal on Glass to see what points, if any, are on
the same level, and to determine levels with reference to each
other and to the opposite outline.

Study carefully through Glass for at least ten minutes. Then
place Glass flat on desk with cover behind it, and draw by sight
on Glass with "Cross" crayon. Do not look through Glass until
all outlines are complete. Then lay crayon on desk and test
result.

Be sure not to make a single correction on Glass by tracing
while it is in position for the test. If all lines do not cover edges
of models, note these mistakes, lay Glass down and correct.
Test again and so continue till result is correct.

Lesson 2. Same Models. Draw on Paper. Place cube on
other side of cylinder.

160 DRAWING AND PAINTING SELF-TAUGHT

Rest Glass on farther side of paper to hold it in place and hold
Glass in position for looking through it to study the group. Use
all tests explained in last lesson and sketch on paper with lead
pencil.

Pupil can compare the direction of an edge behind the Glass
with the frame. In the drawing, this edge must make an equal
angle with the edge of paper. If parallel with edge of frame, it
must be drawn parallel with corresponding edge of paper.

The measurement of the width may be taken by placing pencil
horizontally upon Glass so that left end of pencil covers the
extreme left point of group and covering the extreme right point
of the group with the finger. In the same way, the height of the
group may be set off on the pencil when it is placed on the Glass
parallel with the left and right sides of the frame.

By comparing these measures with those of the drawing, mis-
takes will be readily corrected.

Pupils may also use lead pencil for making "believe draw on the
Glass. Thus the pupil "feels his way," as does the artist who
draws "in the air." Do not distribute "Cross" crayons, so that
there may be no copying of tracings. Pupils who trace and copy
refuse to think and fail to progress.

Lesson 3. Draw by Sight on Glass.

□ Group of a square prism with two faces visible and a

cube with three faces visible, the vertical faces seen
Qj equally. Place models J^" apart, with one nearer than

the other.
Study through Glass. Then place Glass flat on desk with
cover behind it and draw with "Cross" crayon. Use all the
tests explained in L. 1, and as many more as possible.

Lesson 4. The same as last lesson, only three sides
of the square prism are to be shown and two sides of
^f=\ the cube.

" Draw on paper as explained in L. 2.
Lesson 5. Three Models. On Glass.

Draw by sight with "Cross" crayon, the cube, cylinder, and
square plinth. Pupils arrange their own groups and
try to avoid unpleasant combinations.

Study, sketch, and correct as explained in L. 1.
Lesson 6. Three Models. On Paper.
Use cube, square prism, and square plinth.
Proceed as in L. 2.

Lesson 7. Three Models. On Paper.

Use square plinth, small flower pot, and a short

cylinder or cube.

Proceed as in L. 2.

LESSONS FOR GRADED SCHOOLS 161

Lesson 8. Draw on Glass. Three Models.
_^ Use square plinth, small glass jar, and square prism

resting obliquely on desk and on square plinth. Draw
/LJ^S on Glass by sight with " Cross" crayon as explained

Lesson 9. Three Models. On Paper.
Use a small box on which stands a cube with three faces visible,
the two sides showing unequally. Place a square prism obliquely
against box.

Follow directions in L. 2.
Lesson 10. Small Child's Shoe. On Paper.
Study through Glass. "Feel way around" on Glass with lead
pencil and then sketch. Test by measuring the height
and width on the Glass and by taking horizontal and
vertical lines through important points, also by com-
paring outlines with edges of frame. Shade drawing
if there is time.

Other more interesting objects such as open book, fruit and
tumbler, vases, baskets, etc., may be studied if desired.

224. These lessons have been planned for pupils who have
been trained, year by year, according to lessons for lower grades.
Without this training, pupils can not do the work.

All beginners on the Glass, even those in Grade IX., must
start with the simple lessons planned for the lowest grades. Ad-
vanced pupils may, however, take them more rapidly than lower
grade pupils.

USE OF SPIRIT-LEVEL.

Lesson 11. Trace Right Farther Corner of Desk.

Pupil sit facing right corner of his own desk. Hold Glass with
both hands at right angles to line from eye to corner
of desk and without resting Glass on desk. Hold frame
so that bubble remains in center of opening. Study
edges of desk at corner, noting the angles which they
make with the frame. Lay pencils on Glass to cover
these edges, then trace them on the Glass with the "Cross" crayon.

Pupil sit higher or lower and notice that each change makes
the angles different.

Lesson 12. Draw Left Farther Corner of Desk.

Pupil sit facing left farther corner of desk and draw by sight
on Glass, with "Cross" crayon, the edges of the desk
at corner. Hold Glass to test drawing by reference
to the spirit-level. Then place Glass flat on desk and
correct and repeat effort till lines will cover those of
desk.

162 DRAWING AND PAINTING SELF-TAUGHT

Then face corner of neighbor's desk and sketch by sight on the
Glass.

Lesson 13. Strawberry Box on Paper.

Place at left corner of pupil's own desk. Study through Glass,
then measure on Glass and apply tests previously ex-
plained. Indicate the lines of desk behind the box.
Finish with shading if possible.
Lesson 14. Group on Paper.

Place boxes on corner of desk. Draw with lead pen-
cil. Study first through Glass by placing pencils,
measuring, etc.

Represent two edges of desk to show how models
are placed on desk.

Lesson 15. Umbrella. Draw on Paper.

Hang six or eight umbrellas from top of blackboard. Study
through Glass and refer to spirit-level. Shade if possible, with
soft lead pencil.

Lesson 16. Groups of Japanese Lanterns.
Two or three lanterns in each group. Study through Glass,
then sketch on paper and shade. Show background if it adds
to the interest.

GRADE IX.
MODEL AND FURNITURE DRAWING.

Lesson 1. Three Type Forms on Paper.

Place objects on desk or on model rest not far away. Study
through Glass, being careful to hold it at right angles to the
line of vision and so that the bubble shows in the center of the
spirit-level. Use all the tests explained in Grade VIII. Pupils
will not "feel way around" or use any other test any longer than
necessary, but will discard all tests as soon as they can see without
them.

Lesson 2. Model of Chair. By Sight on Glass.

Make of stiff paper, as shown by Fig. 88, and fasten with paper
clips. Place at back of pupil's own desk. Study through Glass
but do not trace with " Cross" crayon. After careful study,
draw by sight on Glass. When completed, test by looking through.
Note errors and place Glass on desk and correct. No tracing of
lines or points when testing.

A toy table, made of stiff paper (see Fig. 88), is a good model.
Place it at back of pupil's own desk and draw by sight on Glass
with "Cross" crayon.

Lesson 3. Larger Cardboard Chair.

Change the design and place on the corner of desk in front of

LESSONS FOR GRADED SCHOOLS 163

pupil. Do not distribute "Cross" crayons. Study model by
holding Glass at arm's length with bubble in center of level. Place
pencils on Glass to cover edges and note angles with frame. Lo-
cate points by plumb-lines, and by knitting needle, by measure-
ments, etc. Sketch finally with lead pencil on paper. Test,
correct, and shade if there is time.

Lesson 4. Cardboard Table. On Paper.

Change the design and increase size, and place model on corner
of desk in opposite aisle. Use spirit-level whenever model is not
in center of pupil's own desk.

Proceed as in last lesson and draw on paper and shade if
possible.

Lesson 5. Chair by Sight on Glass and Paper.

A simple chair on platform or desk. Study carefully through
Glass. Continual reference to level is necessary, for the Glass
is moved unconsciously, and the frame is misleading as a finder
if it is not held horizontal.

Sketch by sight, when the cover is behind the Glass. When
complete, look through and test and correct, etc.

Draw the same chair in different position by sight on paper,
without use of the "Cross" crayon. Study first through Glass,
then sketch on paper with lead pencil of medium grade, then
test and correct.

Draw the long lines of the room behind the chair and shade if
there is time.

Lesson 6. Table at front of room.

Proceed as in last lesson, first drawing by sight on Glass, then
after the position of the table has been slightly changed, making
a drawing in pencil on paper. Shade if possible.

Lesson 7. Stuffed Birds and Animals.

A bird, about the size of a thrush, placed at back of pupil's
own desk.

First, trace bird with "Cross" crayon. Then erase tracing
and face bird the opposite way and study through Glass carefully.

Then trace on Glass a mark to show position of beak, and one
to show tip of tail, and a third to show end of perch. Then lay
Glass down and with the cardboard cover behind Glass sketch
by sight on Glass with "Cross" crayon the bird and the pedestal,
using the marked points to determine the size of the drawing.
Test by looking through, then correct, etc.

Tracing of points for the size is not wise generally, but the bird
is so different from the models studied, that these points may be
traced in the first lesson only.

Lesson 8. Stuffed Bird. Draw on Glass.

Place at back of pupil's own desk, study through Glass. Then

164 DRAWING AND PAINTING SELF-TAUGHT

place cover behind Glass and lay Glass on desk, and draw by
sight on Glass with "Cross" crayon both bird and pedestal. No
tracing of points to determine size. Test when completed.

Lessons 9 and 10. Bird. Draw on Paper.

Same bird as in last lesson. Study through Glass and "feel
way around" on Glass. (See L. 6. Grade IV.) Then make
shaded drawing on paper. Use very soft pencil for the darkest
parts and one not quite so soft for the rest of the sketch.

USE OF SPIRIT-LEVEL.

Lessons 11 and 12. Larger Bird on Paper.

Place on corner of next pupil's desk. Study through the Glass.
Shade if there is time.

Lessons 13 and 14. Stuffed Duck.

Place on desk in front and across the aisle. Study through
Glass by use of spirit-level. Then make shaded drawing on
paper.

Lessons 15 and 16. Stuffed Squirrel.

Place on desk in front of pupil. Study through Glass and make
shaded sketch on paper.

The number of lessons required for these results can not be
fixed, as much depends on the length of lesson and the prepara-
tion in other grades. A double period is almost necessary for
satisfactory results.

Pupils in this grade can not do the same amount of work, for
some need to be hurried, and others working at leisure can pro-
duce twice as many drawings as their neighbors.

If desired, the birds and animals may be studied before the
furniture. In this case there should be more tracing and more
drawing by sight on the Glass.

PAPER MODELS MADE BY PUPILS FOR USE WITH GLASS.

225. 1. Card 1%" square.

2. Circular card h1/^" diameter.

3. Oblong card b%," x 8".

4. Cylindrical model from oblong 5%" x 12" and two

circular cards 3J^" diameter.

5. Circular plinth from oblong 2" x 12" without circles.

7. Square prism 2^" x 2^" x 5".

8. Rectangular prism \y2" x 3^" x 6".

9. Square plinth V/%" x 4".

LESSONS FOR GRADED SCHOOLS 165

10. Table. )

11. Arm Chair. [ See Fig. 88.

12. Plant Stand. )

The cube of 2%" is correct size for study of principles. For
groups a 2J4" cube is needed.

The square prism (No. 7) is correct size for study of principles.
For groups a smaller one is necessary.

When not in use these models can be kept flat in an envelope
between drawing papers, and the clips which are used to fasten
models together should also be kept in the same envelope.

The models should be made of heavy construction paper, and
before folding the lines should be creased by a pin.

Grade IX. From mounted specimen.

CUBE

j

CM

i

i

f

j

CM

t

-U

CM

i

Y-

-i

NZZ^

I

i

square plinth

PLANT STAND

I

t,

w

-its

TABLE

jlLJ L— J*_ I— I L_! I I — : — I

T

k Z' -*i

ARM CHAIR

Fig. 88. — Developments of paper models for individual use.

Chapter X.
ADVICE TO THE ART STUDENT.

226. Art is More than Representation. — Art is superior
to the facts of appearance. If this were not so the camera and
the scientist would produce the best art. Art is a personal ex-
pression not so much of the material and visual facts as of the
spiritual. Art reflects the emotions and inspiration of the artist
even more than it does the optical image. Therefore there can
be no formulas, recipes, or short cuts, and you waste time and
mone}^ and your chance of real success as long as you try to find
or evolve such.

227. Advertisements Deceptive. — If you can be satisfied to
do commercial work that gives no reputation and slight returns,
answer one of the many advertisements that seem to insure a
short cut to fame and wealth ; but try at least to realize that these
promises are every bit as absurd as they would be considered if
they related to success as a pianist with no need for long practice
or finger exercises.

When education in art is as well understood as is education in
music it will not pay to advertise the impossible feat of success
in art without the years of hard work that the most talented re-
quire under the best instruction. Sir Joshua Reynolds stated
the facts as follows:

" Excellence is never granted to man but as the result of labour.
... A facility of drawing like that of playing upon a musical
instrument cannot be acquired but by an infinite number of
acts. . . . You must have no dependence on your own genius.
If you have great talents, , industry will improve them; if you
have but moderate abilities, industry will supply their deficiency.
Nothing is denied to well directed labour, nothing is to be ob-
tained without it. . . . I will venture to assert, that assiduity
unabated by difficulty, and a disposition eagerly directed to the
object of its pursuit will produce effects similar to those which
some call the result of natural powers."

228. Art Instruction Fails. — Art instruction is too generally
directed to technique and finish or fads rather than to true vision.
This crippling mistake is responsible for the general failure of
art study whether in elementary or advanced schools, for the
technique of any medium is difficult in proportion to the inability

DRAWING AND PAINTING SELF-TAUGHT

to see truly. True vision will always find a way to expression,
and therefore you must not believe that you should study water-
colors, or oils, or pastels, or any other medium as if you were

Fig. 89.— Public Library, by first-year student.

studying different subjects. Until your eyes are true you should
have but one problem, that of perfecting your vision, and no
technique should be permitted that takes your attention largely
from the thought of truthful representation.

ADVICE TO THE ART STUDENT 169

There are problems of technique that a teacher will aid in
solving if you are not led to believe that there is only one right
way. This idea is generally fatal to success, for the best way
must be your own way, and you must find it, and change and
develop it as your vision and your aims develop.

If you see your teacher or any artist painting, try to see others
solve the same problem that you may realize how artists work in
such different ways that even when their vision is equally true,
their results may have slight resemblance even when done from
the same subject.

Do not accept without question the opinions of any instructor
or school, for specialists seldom have a broad education and often
contradict each other. But when in any class or school you
should do your best to follow the instruction given, and if you
can not do this you should drop out.

Art schools taught by painters often neglect theory and science,
while those taught by educators theorize at the expense of draw-
ing and painting. Thus you will seldom gain in one school all
that you need unless you obtain aid outside the school from
books or correspondence courses.

229. The natural result of differences between teachers is a
difference of opinion between artists, including those who teach
and those who do not teach. On the one side are those who
value the truthful vision the old masters had and who believe in
trying to give students this vision even if it does take all the
students' time for the six or eight years of art school study. On
the other side are those artists who, realizing the failure of many
good painters and draftsmen in the direction of design and com-
position, believe the student should be taught to express himself
freely at the expense of all scientific and exact nature study.
This effort to gain art, at the expense of all refinement of form and
truth of appearance, has proceeded so far as to have nearly proven
the absurdity of this attempt to obtain something in art for
nothing in effort.

The methods of this book enable the average student to gain
truthful vision in so short a time that there is no excuse for not
studying memory drawing, design, and composition, and thus
being able to do far better in that artistic free expression which
is the master's pleasure, than is possible for those who have never
had time to master the geometry of nature or the artist's percep-
tion of her appearances.

230. Anatomy Indispensable. — Anatomy is a difficult subject
even for art school students who have lectures and casts and the
life model to aid them, but you can master this subject if you are
in earnest and will draw the bones and muscles and antique

170 DRAWING AND PAINTING SELF-TAUGHT

figure upon the Glass as you studied the geometric subjects.
It is wise, however, not to make a theoretical study of anatomy
until you can draw the geometric forms easily and have also
gained power to draw well from casts of the antique.

231. The Bones. — The skeleton is the basis of all outward
forms, and so you should begin by drawing it in all possible posi-
tions. If you can not draw from a mounted skeleton which may
be in some museum, art school, or doctor's office, you may be
able to borrow parts of the skeleton, such as the skull and the arm
and the leg, or you may be able to purchase casts or models of
these, and the other principal bones. You should draw these
on the Glass in all possible positions, and then you should draw
them from memory until you can draw them in any position
which they may be imagined to have. When able to give action
and foreshortening on the Glass you should draw on paper and
give the details.

A lay figure will greatly aid the student. These may be found
of all sizes and prices up to life size, but an inexpensive small
one will suggest the action and proportion and greatly aid in
drawing the bones and muscles.

232. The Muscles. — After this practice buy anatomical
plaster casts of the head, hand, and foot, showing the surface
muscles, and draw these in all possible positions, first on the
Glass and later on paper. As you draw the muscles you should
study books on anatomy to learn the names of the bones and
muscles, and the attachments and actions of the muscles. You
should also try to find opportunity to study a cast of the entire
figure that shows all the surface muscles.

233. The Antique. — Now buy casts of details of the figure
including the head, hand, foot, the eye, ear, mouth, and nose, and
draw these in many different positions on the Glass, and when you
succeed on the Glass draw all these details on paper.

You should now be able to draw the skeleton and the surface
muscles as they would appear within the casts of the antique to
be found in art museums. If you can not visit museums for
study, buy the largest cast of the entire figure that you can afford,
and draw it on the Glass in all possible positions. Afterwards
draw it on paper, representing the bones and muscles, and draw
this figure often from memory.

234. Draw from Life. — Draw from life also in a sketch-book
which you should always carry. Draw the seated people you
may find in parks, and those walking, working, or playing, that
you may see. Draw them from memory as well as from obser-
vation. In the gymnasium and at the beach and swimming pool
you have a fine chance to study the figure in action and prove

ADVICE TO THE ART STUDENT 171

the knowledge you have gained from the books and casts. If
several students in the same town are studying drawing, they may
form a sketch class and take turns in posing or in supplying a
model. Where there is a will the way will be found even in this
most difficult subject.

You need never lack a subject from which to study the figure
if you have a couple of large mirrors at your disposal, for in one
you can draw yourself as seen from in front, and by use of two
you can draw yourself in many other positions.

235. Excellent practice may also be had by copying drawings
and photographs of people and animals and of sculpture. These
are fine subjects for memory drawings.

The above course of study will give you more power to draw
the figure than you will gain in any course on anatomy that con-
sists simply of the study of books and copying charts and black-
board drawings.

236. Perspective. — In Ruskin's day the laws of free-hand
perspective had not been formulated, and the distortions of plane
perspective prevented students from seeing truly. If you wish
to be a painter or a sculptor you may not need, more than the
theory of free-hand perspective, but if you intend to be an illus-
trator, decorator, architect, or teacher you need the full science
that determines the direction and length of every line by use
of its vanishing and measuring points or by use of working draw-
ings.

237. Still Life. — Whatever your ambition you should master
still life in outline, values and color, for true vision comes faster
from still life study than from any other subject, and you will
save time in figure painting by the study of still life.

I have given no directions for the drawing and painting of the
figure, because you will not need more assistance than that de-
rived from your study of the subjects that I have explained.

The lenses will aid you as much in figure painting as in any
other subject. This is proven by the requests that I have had
from artists for large size lenses for use in their own figure painting.

238. Working Drawings. — Every High School graduate
should be able to read and make working drawings, construct
the figures of plane geometry, and define the lines, angles, plane
figures, and solids of geometry. If without this knowledge, the
student should gain at least as much as is given in Chapters I,
II, III, IV, and XI and under Definitions of "Mechanical Draw-
ing" by the author.

It is a mistake for art schools not to give this instruction, for
whatever you are to do you should be able to make simple plans
and elevations. A friend who is a portrait painter once said to

172 DRAWING AND PAINTING SELF-TAUGHT

me that the year of study he gave to mechanical drawing was
of more benefit to him than any other part of his art school course.

239. Art School Study. — When all possible power has been
gained in a few years of home study the student is advised to
attend some art school where he may draw, paint, and model
the human figure, and work in the composition and sketch classes.
As helpful as these classes is the association with the strong
students of the advanced classes, and often the serious student
will be able to enter advanced classes with very brief study in
preparatory classes. Art schools may not be necessary for those
of great genius, but they are advisable, and the student should
make every effort to study in one for at least two or three years
after he has done all he can at home. The student who finds
this impossible may console himself by finding out how many
artists have succeeded without the aid of art schools even when
art study has been delayed to mature life.

240. General Education Necessary. — Some parents think
that a child who has no special talent for other studies may succeed
in an art school, and so many students waste time and money be-
cause they lack general education and sometimes the ability to
acquire it.

The art student should have at least High School training, and
College is preferable if drawing and painting can be studied
throughout this course.

Special attention should be given to the History of Art, Archi-
tecture, Ornament and Costumes, for without this study the artist
is confined to subjects before his eyes, and special illustrations
at short notice are impossible. Edwin A. Abbey is said to have
paid out for models and costumes more than he received for
some of his works, and once he traveled from England to Spain
to draw one subject from nature. He thus set an example which
the student should study with profit, though in his later years
Abbey might have improved his art if he had trained his memory
to be* less confined to the model.

241. Defer Technical Study. — Do not specialize for Design,
Decoration, the Crafts, or any special trades until after you have
had at least two or three years of drawing and painting in the
best art school you can find or have gained the equivalent by
the use of the Glass and lenses at home.

Industrial art is not possible without designers who are artists,
by birth and training, and you waste your time and chances if
you begin in any technical school that does not make its first
instruction include that of the school of fine art. When you can
draw and paint and take rank as an artist it will be a simple thing
for you to master the technique of any industry or art and succeed

ADVICE TO THE ART STUDENT 173

far better than you could by making this your special effort
from the start. The best paid designers are generally those who
have had training as artists as well as designers.

The artist's problems are difficult, and so specialists have not
insisted on a preparatory art school training; but now the methods
of this book so shorten the time formerly required for true vision,
that those who would succeed in industrial art must give time
to the study of fine art.

242. Art Includes All Beauty. — Some of the finest art
ever produced was made in the Orient hundreds of years ago.
Machinery has made it as cheap to apply too much ornament
as the proper quantity which the artist would have used. Thus
the artisan and the machine have supplanted the artist.

Whistler's Judgment. — "If art be rare to-day it was seldom
heretofore. It is false this teaching of decay. The master stands
in no relation to the moment at which he occurs. ... He is no
more the product of civilization than is the scientific truth as-
serted dependent upon the wisdom of a period. The assertion
itself requires the man to make it. The truth was from the be-
ginning.

"So Art is limited to the infinite and beginning there can not
progress. . . . Art cares not and hies her off to the East to find a
favorite with whom she lingers caressing his blue porcelain in-
different to all save the virtue of his refinement.

"And again to the West that her next lover may bring together
the gallery at Madrid and show to the world how the master
towers above all; and in their intimacy they revel, he and she,
in this knowledge; and he knows the happiness untasted by other
mortal." (From "Ten O'Clock.")

243. Apply Art to Industry. — Though Whistler told the truth
about the rarity of really great art you need not give up your
study of art, or your intention of applying it to some vocation.
Though you may not be one of the few great artists, you may
still develop such refined perception for form and color that you
may aid in directing public taste from the cheap and vulgar to
the chaste and beautiful.

You may surely do this and enjoy your life and work if you
are in earnest. But if reading this chapter and one of the same
heading in "Light and Shade" can turn you from the study of
.art, then it is wise for you to find some other subject in which
you can be more interested to really work hard. You can not
succeed in any work unless you have faith in yourself and such
love for the work that you refuse to accept failure as final, no
matter how long success may be deferred.

When you have gained rank as an artist, if you are not able to

174 DRAWING AND PAINTING SELF-TAUGHT

sell your pictures, you should apply your power to some com-
mercial or industrial art, for it is wiser to gain a living in this
way and be free to paint as you like for pleasure, than to feel
obliged to paint as you do not wish to, in order to dispose of your
work.

244. Refuse to Fail. — If tempted by discouragement read
the lives of the noted artists and inventors and discover how often
their success has come after years and even a lifetime of failure.
Recently the papers told how Edison had failed hundreds of
times before he solved a problem that seemed very simple. Sar-
gent, who is now said by some to be the world's greatest painter,
works more hours daily than the majority of students, and still
scrapes his canvas clean many times before he gains a result
that he is willing to keep.

You will therefore be wise to conclude that success is the result
of refusing to accept failure as final; and of working patiently
on each picture until you make it as perfect as you can see and
feel.

Whether your final style will be due to direct solid brush work,
or to indirect methods, you must have faith in yourself, for nothing
is more fatal to health and success than fear. If you are unfor-
tunate enough to believe in luck or fate, or inherited conditions,
you should read the book "Success is for You" by Dorothy Quig-
ley, and discover that education may increase brain power to
such an extent that children so deficient mentally as to be en-
tirely unable to attend public schools, may gain average mental
power by study in a special school for such students.

245. Believe in Yourself. — Some students are fortunate in
inherited ability that brings success at an early age, but many
who think they are thus favored, and who trust to their genius
more than to hard work, fail to maintain their fortunate start.
Many others who have been failures in school secure permanent
success through the gradual development of their power which
comes from the capacity for taking infinite pains. Scientists now
admit that undesirable inherited qualities may be overcome, and
good qualities greatly increased. You should therefore have
faith in your inherited abilities and greater faith in those latent
powers that may be developed by patient hard work.

246. Believe in a Higher Power. — Your chances of success
will also be increased if you can have a religious faith in a power
greater than your own that inspires to the best, and aids all
honest, unselfish effort. Belief in an omnipotent source that
rules with love and justice, and rewards faith, prayer, and all
right effort will enable you to overcome failures until they lead
to final success.

ADVICE TO THE ART STUDENT 175

Honest students of nature have in all ages gained very similar
views of the Unity of God and man and the reality of a life after
this, and if it is possible for you to declare confidently that it is
"God who worketh in you and through you" your power will be
increased equally with your joy in living.

■p/nS"

Grade IX. From mounted specimen.

Chapter XI.
THE FAILURE OF EDUCATION.

247. Graft. — A significant incident came to my attention
•during the war. At a gathering of artists and teachers, the much
discussed subject of war graft became the topic of conversation.
One of those present remarked that graft was not confined to
business and politics but is so potent in education that educators
do not feel secure in their positions or free to teach as they wish.

A member of a School Board said that he had recently known
of a teacher who paid a member of a School Board fifty dollars
upon receiving an appointment as teacher.

An interested teacher described the effort of an agent for a
book firm to obtain an order, and said that when the agent
found he could not make a sale he said, "It may be worth while
for you to know that Committees often act upon the suggestions
of our firm as to the fitness or unfitness of a teacher." Shortly
after this when this teacher was not re-elected and no reason was
given for the discharge, the instructor remembered the agent's
words and wondered if they were based upon a power able to
influence the School Board.

248. Teachers Not Free. — An artist who taught part of the
time then took the floor and related that she had been obliged to
change her course in drawing by the report of a special committee
of experts appointed by the School Board. She was positive
that the members of this advisory committee were not influenced
either directly or indirectly by selfish or financial interests, and
yet their report forced her either to give up teaching or to sub-
stitute for her course one more in harmony with those of text-
book publishers.

An instructor in one of the most noted schools in the country
informed us that the report of a similar committee had caused
free-hand drawing to be dropped from the course in spite of the
objections of the Dean and his Faculty.

249. Teachers Not Respected. — Another teacher arose to
say that teachers were resigning, not so much on account of the
larger salaries in business, as to escape the influences that have
changed ideals in the school-room and out, so that the teacher
is less respected than formerly. She said that pupils are not
taught obedience and respect in many homes, and that in some

FIRST-YEAR STUDENT'S HOME WORK.

Fig. 90. — Each student made many sketches outside the school. Unsatis-
factory work was rejected until acceptable sketches could be made without

assistance.

DRAWING AND PAINTING SELF-TAUGHT

schools teachers are not permitted to enforce obedience or per-
sonally punish or discipline to secure order and the hard work
that is needed for good lessons. Thus the teachers now have to

Fig. 91. — Faneuil Hall, by first-year student.

do much for the pupils that was not required formerly. In ad-
dition there are so many outside demands for posters, fairs, pag-
eants, etc. that there is little time left for instruction.

250. Teachers Overworked. — A special instructor said that

THE FAILURE OF EDUCATION 179

another reason for the failure of the average student is the fact
that teachers have so much to do as clerks that they do not have
time or strength for teaching. She read the following from "Com-
mon Ground" (July, 1921):—

"Few indeed are the teachers who have not at some time or
other pondered whether they were really teachers or clerks who
did teaching between times. In other words there is need for
relieving teachers of a greater part of the clerical work which is
now assigned to them, so that they may be free to devote their
time and strength to their proper work of teaching." The follow-
ing was then read from the Journal of Education : —

"Teaching as it has been traditionalized in the last quarter of a
century has been a strain on all class room teachers and the
multitude of new requirements have been an overstrain."

251. Under the influences that have opposed drawing from
nature in the Grammar School, there has been substituted much
in the line of manual training. This work is interesting and
valuable and makes an attractive exhibition, but often forces
the Director who wishes to teach real drawing, to give up this
effort and devote the time to some constructive work which has
been seen and admired in the exhibit of a neighboring town.
Thus it happens that High School graduates are seldom able to
draw from objects, and often do not understand the simplest
geometrical terms, for the study of geometrical and working
drawings is as much neglected as that of object drawing. I would
not omit the cutting and making of patterns and models. On the
contrary, I would add to its importance by sometimes making
the models from working drawings, but I do object to the entire
neglect of object drawing and often equal neglect of working
drawings.

252. Graduated Instead of Instructed. — Another teacher
said that the conscientious instructor is often forced to give up
either her position or the effort to maintain high standards of
work by those above her who insist on diplomas for students
who have failed in their studies. Others said that they had been
forced to pass students who had not tried to study so often that
they had found it impossible to maintain high standards in dis-
cipline or examinations. As a result, students graduate with the
idea that success is possible without effort.

253. College Graduates Deficient.— Pres. K. C. M. Sills of
Bowdoin College says in his report of 1921 : "There are two weak-
nesses so glaring they call for extended comment. There is a
very general complaint on the part not only of business men but
also of men in professional life that the College graduate of today
cannot write decent English."

180 DRAWING AND PAINTING SELF-TAUGHT

"A second defect is found in the unwillingness of the College
graduate of today to assume responsibility. He thinks it is his
right that the College should give him an education, and that the
responsibility is on the College and not on him."

254. This report says, "It is impossible to prove that graduates
today are not as competent as in former days," therefore I wish
to print in full the course required in different years in the Fresh-
man Class in the Art school in which I have taught continuously
from September, 1883, to January, 1921. The students were
High School graduates who came from the entire state.

FRESHMAN WORK IN 1883-84.
INSTRUMENTAL DRAWINGS.

1. Geometrical problems. 2. Perspective. 3. Orthographic
Projection. 4. Machine Drawing. 5. Building Construction.
6. Isometric Projection. 7. Projection of Shadows.

The above were finished in red and black ink lines and often
upon washes of color, and there were numerous lecture sheets on
each of the seven subjects.

FREE-HAND DRAWINGS.

8. Models in outline. 9. Models in chalk. 10. Models in
water-color monochrome. 11. Models in charcoal. 12. Outline
from cast of ornament. 13. Outline from foliage from nature.
14. Outline from cast of detail of human figure. 15. Outline
from cast of animal. 16. Outline from furniture. 17. Charcoal
or chalk point from cast of ornament. 18. Cast shaded with
sepia or India ink. 19. Original Design from plant to fill geo-
metric form. 20. Design for Encaustic Tile, Book Cover, Cotton
Print, Oil Cloth, Wall Paper or Lace. 21. Specimen Drawing
Exercises for public schools. 22. Painting in water-color of a
flower from nature. 23. Analysis of styles of Historic Ornament.
24. Botanical Analysis of plant and four designs from it.

Examinations.

1. Plane Geometrical Drawing. 2. Orthographic Projection.
3. Perspective Practice. 4. Perspective Theory. 5. Model
Drawing from solid. 6. Isometric Projection. 7. Projection of
Shadows. 8. Machine Drawing. 9. Building Construction.
10. Historic Ornament. 11. Harmony of Color. 12. Drawing
from Dictation. 13. Normal Instruction. — Examinations during
the year and finals at the end were given in the above subjects.

I

c3

bfi

a

o

182 DRAWING AND PAINTING SELF-TAUGHT

FRESHMAN WORK IN 1907-08.
CERTIFICATE DRAWINGS.

1. Problems in Plane Geometry (Instrumental). 2. Model
drawing in outline. 3. Group of common objects in outline.
4. Light and shade from colored objects. 5. Light and shade
from draperies. 6. Light and shade from cast of historic orna-
ment. 7. Details of human figure from cast. 8. Details of
animal form from cast. 9. Details from historic schools of orna-
ment. 10. Pencil, pen and ink and brush rendering from approved
examples. 11. Water-color studies from still life and flowers.
12. Applied design.

Examinations.

1. Plane geometric problems (Instrumental). 2. Theory of
Model Drawing. 3. Drawing from details of the antique. 4.
Drawing from objects. 5. Historic Ornament and design.

255. Lowered Standards. — The required work in 1908 equals
46% of that required in 1884. Most of the students prior to 1900
were able to complete the class in one year. After 1900 the
majority required two years to do this work, and so the six diffi-
cult scientific subjects which occasioned most of the failures were
dropped, and less was required in the free-hand subjects.

In still more recent years the requirements were further reduced,
with the result that the graduates have not been as successful
as those of the years in which Walter Smith's courses were in
effect. This was recognized, and some of the scientific subjects
were put back within a few years. The students find these sub-
jects difficult because of lack of preparation in the High School,
but the serious ones are able to master them and do good work. In
free-hand drawing the students of recent years have done better
work than has ever been produced in the school; thus proving
there is no lack of brain power, but of the sound and broad pre-
paratory training which made the students in the early years of
the school better able to do independent hard work and under-
stand scientific subjects.*

256. Ethical Training Needed. — The failure in education
arises from the failure of the home and the church to maintain

* Since these pages were written many changes have been made in the school. The require-
ments for admission and for graduation and the hours of study have been increased. Specializ-
ing in the lower classes has been stopped and more earnest effort demanded in all the classes.

It will take many years to fully overcome unsatisfactory conditions in education, for the
causes are not local, and no individual can quickly influence the thought of a State or a Nation.
But if the State will support this new effort to get back to the sane ideals of earlier days, it
may in time prove that success in art and in industry equally demand the old-fashioned training
in both Science and Art that Walter Smith fought for at the expense of fortune and life.

THE FAILURE OF EDUCATION 183

the high ideals of those who founded this nation. The desire
for wealth has led to graft and corruption that are felt in every
direction, so that we are compared with Rome before its fall and
told that its fate will become ours if we do not quickly find a way
to end graft by taking our offices out of political control and doing
away with the injustice that threatens us now.

It is often claimed by those whose opinions are worthy of
serious consideration that religion is the most important factor
in the life of a nation. If this is true, it is important to find some
way to give to all children simple ethical training in the truths
that all religions accept, which must be believed and practiced by
the individual or nation that is to live and prosper. Such es-
sentials can be taught without coming under the head of religious
teaching. In fact, I believe this instruction is now demanded by
the law of 1860 which specifies that "good behaviour" shall be one
of the required subjects.

257. Artists on School Boards. — The remedy for every evil is
knowledge, and those affecting art education today will be over-
come when the best artists and designers of the nation are able to
act as members of School Boards and State Boards of Education.

As far as possible every such Board should have among its
members the best painter and the best sculptor together with the
best architect. It may not be possible to find enough men of these
professions to serve in smaller cities and towns, but they can be
found for State Boards and State Schools and the larger cities.
Their influence in these places will in time be felt in all others,
and cause drawing to be more practical and helpful, and to mean
the elements of real drawing instead of the superficial showy
work that now so often causes neglect of the elements.

258. National Control. — National control is advocated as the
remedy, but when we investigate its results abroad, we question
whether it will be a benefit before selfish motives can be sup-
planted by the desire for public good.

State and National control should mean that the best methods
are explained and aid given to overcome local difficulties. Such
control should suggest results desired and ways to attain them,
but it should not enforce detailed steps, methods, exercises, and
technique, or forbid original experiments. It should commend
good results that prove power to see truly and work independently,
regardless of the technique and methods.

Supervision that rigidly fixes details of subject, medium, and
technique will do more harm than good, for even if the Director
were a second Michael Angelo, he would fail, if he attempted to
destroy the individuality and freedom of his assistants. Rigid
rules for technique and methods emanate from amateurs and

184 DRAWING AND PAINTING SELF-TAUGHT

publishers. Even if a strong artist should attempt to formulate
them for general use he would fail to benefit the teachers he was
trying to aid, for they would not understand or apply them
correctly.

Art requires freedom and spontaneous expression, without
much thought of technique. The educator who insists on
thought about subject, technique, and pedagogical steps thus
renders art impossible.

There is no question about the good that could be done by a
National Art Director if one could be found as competent and
courageous as Prof. Walter Smith; provided he could be upheld
in his judgment, which would of course be as unsatisfactory to
the publishers as was that of Professor Smith. Those who know
the influences that are exerted upon officials will hesitate to
further increase government control of art education until such
control can be freed from the influences of big business.

259. Drawing Courses Controlled. — From Walter Smith's
time to the present the adoption and use of books and materials
have often been secured by means and methods little suspected by
the • general public. Those who are informed say that the field
of education has proven as profitable and as susceptible to trust
methods as other lines of public necessities.

When drawing books were generally used by all the pupils
in all the grades, the yearly sales were very large and the profits
so great that every effort was made to secure adoptions. In
recent years books for pupils have been less used, and today the
drawing teacher has no conception of the conditions that ruled
a few years ago when positions were so largely controlled by the
firms whose books were most widely used. Today publishers'
influences relating to drawing instruction are felt most in the
selection of teachers whose recommendations for positions may
be withdrawn if the teacher asserts that he will be independent
and absolutely free to use whatever books or methods seem best
to him.

The most pernicious influence in elementary schools arises
from the power of the text-book firms to plan the instruction
that shall be given in these schools and almost force its adoption
by indirect means that are never even suspected. How complete
this control is will be discovered if, perchance, the strongest
painter in the country should be appointed to any School Board
with the idea of making drawing in the public schools more
practical. The chances are that after a few years of futile effort
this artist would resign in despair of ever changing the fashions
that seem to regulate what shall be taught in the drawing
course as rigidly as the fashions in dress fix the cut and length
of sleeves and skirts.

THE FAILURE OF EDUCATION 185

The applicant for a position to teach drawing in the public
and elementary schools is asked first for the diploma or degree
of some School. Without this diploma professional power to
draw and paint and even success as a teacher count for but little,
and the independent teacher of ability has little chance to keep a
position except by following the latest fashions, no matter how
absurd they ma}' be.

260. Kansas State Law. — Frequent complaints are heard
from teachers that they are forced to change books and methods
so often that the pupils barely begin to succeed with a method
before they are forced to change to another. Teachers can not
publish facts that reflect on the influences back of changes in
text-books, therefore little becomes public; but it is a fact that
the State of Kansas has passed a law which does away with text-
book influences upon local School Boards.

"This law provides that a commission selected for that pur-
pose, after a thorough examination of all the samples submitted,
shall designate the books best suited to the schools of our state,
and that then these shall be the basal texts used throughout the
state, supplemented only by other books likewise chosen by this
commission.

"Some of these texts, in fact all texts used in the elementary
schools are now printed at our own State Printing Plant, the
original manuscripts having been purchased by the State, or a
royalty being paid on the plates.

"This action was taken for several' reasons, — lower cost, greater
convenience to pupils and patrons, and the many advantages of
uniformity being the chief ones."

Other advantages than those named result from this plan, and
it seems that Kansas has shown the way to great improvement
in our education.

Chapter XII.
STATE LAWS ON DRAWING.

261. Drawing a Required Subject. — Recently a School Board
made drawing an optional study in Grammar Schools, thus de-
stroying its value. This action was taken in ignorance of the
following laws: —

Gen. Laws, Ch. 71, S. 1, as amended. "Every town shall
maintain ... a sufficient number pf schools . . . and shall give
instruction in orthography, reading, writing, the English lan-
guage and grammar, geography, arithmetic, drawing, the history
of the United States, the duties of citizenship, physiology and
hygiene, good behaviour, in-door and out-door games and athletic
exercise. ..."

Gen. Laws, Ch. 71, S. 18. "Evening Schools." "Any town
may, and every town in which there are issued certificates author-
izing the employment of twenty or more persons who do not
possess the educational qualifications enumerated in Sect. 1 of
Chap. 76, shall, maintain for not less than forty evenings during
the following year an evening school or schools for the instruc-
tion of persons over fourteen years of age, in orthography, read-
ing, writing, the English language and grammar, geography,
arithmetic, industrial drawing both free-hand and mechanical,
the history of the United States, physiology and hygiene and
good behaviour. ..."

262. The amendment which made drawing a required sub-
ject was passed May 16, 1870, and the wisdom of this act has
not been questioned until the present time. One of the most
noted educators in the country recently wrote as follows: "I
doubt if the School Committee that will make drawing an op-
tional study can properly be called educators."

263. Publishers' Responsibility. — The condition of drawing
today is the logical result of the effort to make drawing interest-
ing by substituting for the hard work of truthful study from
nature, the easier problem of copying to produce results more
attractive to the untrained eye.

The first retrograde step was taken when the publishers printed
dots in spaces formerly blank, that copies might be produced
more quickly and more books sold in a year.

The next step was to take out the difficult problems in in-

STATE LAWS ON DRAWING 187

strumental drawing. After this, drawing from objects and
nature was supplanted by picture study and illustrative work
made without visual training in perspective. The last step was
taken when text-books for pupils were published with the state-
ment that the power to draw from objects is of such slight value,
that the study of design and art should take its place in the
Grammar Grades.

School graduates never had so little power in drawing from
objects as they manifest today, and it is not strange that an
effort should be made to make drawing an optional study by
those not well informed on this subject.

But this failure in free-hand drawing is not the failure of a
true drawing course, but of a narrow and weak substitute forced
upon this age through the control of education by financial in-
terests.

264. Teachers' Responsibility. — Teachers are in part respon-
sible for this condition, since the publishers have sought to pro-
duce books that would sell to the largest number, by consulting
teachers everywhere and trying to combine their differing opin-
ions so as to please all. Too many cooks spoil the broth, and
in this instance have not only made drawing of little value in
the schools, but have brought about decreased sales of books
for pupils' use that seems just retribution.

265. Publishers can not shift all responsibility to the teachers,
for they exerted their authority against the sane education planned
by Walter Smith and forced him to relinquish his rights and
supervision entirely. If they had wisely exerted their power
in favor of a sound education instead of popular and, for the
moment, salable fads they might have retained a profitable
business and increased the value of drawing in the schools.

If half the effort and money expended in the past forty years
in chasing fads and unrelated ideals of the rainbow nature had
been spent under the continued direction of Walter Smith, this
nation would today be the best informed on fine and industrial
art lines of any nation on earth.

266. Report of College Examiners. — To show that I have
not over-stated the evil results of text-book control and the
changes that are needed if this nation is to maintain itself as a
manufacturing nation, I will quote from a letter published by
the Board of College Entrance Examiners of New York on March

"In the opinion of the committee of examiners in Freehand
Drawing, the quality of the work in the examinations in this
subject has, in spite of the new set of requirements adopted in
1912, shown so little improvement, that it seems best to this

188 DRAWING AND PAINTING SELF-TAUGHT

committee again to call the attention of teachers to these new
requirements, a copy of which is appended, and to state briefly
something of what it understands to have been the general aims
of the committee which drew them up.

"In the opinion of the present committee of examiners, the
general purpose of the new requirements was to encourage system-
atic training in drawing as a means of description of form, as a
valuable mode of expression in itself, useful in connection with
almost every occupation and profession, and also as an invaluable
aid in the development of the power of observation. At the
same time the committee of revision., wished to discourage as far
as possible the superficial attempts at 'artistic' production which
have unfortunately been common in preparatory school work.
It felt that a clear distinction ought to be made between design
in the terms of drawing or painting on a flat surface, and the
description of the aspect of objects by means of drawing. The
latter is a useful means of expression like a language; and in the
teaching of drawing from this point of view, accuracy of obser-
vation and of description should be recognized as of primary
importance. The principles of design, on the other hand, can be
taught much better in connection with abstract drawing and
painting in lines and flat tones in which representation is either
suppressed entirely or subordinated to the aim of orderly arrange-
ment. The attempt to combine the two points of view in the
production of works that shall look "artistic'' has, under present
conditions of preparatory school teaching, usually led to results
which have been unsatisfactory both from the standpoint of
design and from that of representation of form, and has, by its
superficial pretence, actually tended to degrade the taste and to
blunt, rather than to sharpen, the observation of the pupils.

"In the opinion of the committee of examiners, school courses
should be so arranged that courses in design come in the lower
grades, for children can be taught the fundamental principles
of order at a very early age, and thej^ take readily to practice
in design as well as to representation in the abstract mode of
line and flat tone. On the other hand, the accurate description
of objects as existing in the round, involving an understanding of
perspective projection, is usually too difficult for younger children,
and this may very well be confined to the higher grades, perhaps
to the high school. In this kind of drawing most valuable train-
ing in taste may at the same time be secured by the selection of
objects to be drawn with regard to their quality from the point of
view of design. There is no better way to stimulate one's sense
of beauty than to make accurate studies of works of art or of fine
natural form. Examples of the work of the greatest draughtsmen

STATE LAWS ON DRAWING 189

of the world are now easily accessible in the form of photographs,
and these ought to be constantly studied and some of them copied
as standards of performance. For use of line, Egyptian wall-
paintings, Greek vase-paintings, Chinese, Japanese, and Persian
paintings or drawings are especially to be recommended; for
expression of form by means of shading, the figure drawing of
the great masters of the Renaissance are especially instructive.

"To make the work of the higher grades more definite and
systematic, the committee of revision thought that it was better
to leave out the expression of color values; and particular atten-
tion is now called to the statement in the requirements, 'without
attempt to represent color or color values', and to the customary
phrase in the examination questions, 'without regard to color
value'. By color value is of course meant the degree of lightness
or darkness due to the actual color (the local tone) of the object,
as opposed to the lightness or darkness due to the relative illu-
mination of surface. On account of the greater complexity of
value relations involved, as well as on account of the comparative
ease with which a certain specious pictorial effect may be ob-
tained, the attempt to express color values has, under preparatory
school conditions, tended to induce inaccurate and slovenly
work; but it ought to be possible, on the other hand, to give in
these schools entirely adequate training in accurate description
of the form of simple objects in light and shade — that is, drawing
in which the attention is confined to the rendering of relative
illumination of surface.

"The examiners do not wish to prescribe any particular tech-
nique of shading, but they do wish to make clear what kind of
drawing is expected on the examination papers. They also wish
to emphasize the fact that, with all consideration of color values
omitted, the expression of form by a rendering of the relative
degrees of illumination of the different planes of modelling may
be perfectly achieved. The representation of the different degrees
of shade may be abstract, in two or three tones, giving only the
main distinctions of light and shade (objects seen in sunlight
make especially good subjects for this kind of drawing on account
of the clean-cut division between light and shade), or it may give
complete modelling.

"Aside from the question of omission of color values, the draw-
ings submitted by candidates in this subject have revealed most
serious faults. They have indicated, first of all, a lack of proper
training in the establishment of positions and measures in the
laying out of the drawings; too little stress has been laid on the
fundamental principles of perspective; and not enough attention
has been given to training in the understanding of the structure
of the objects drawn.

190 DRAWING AND PAINTING SELF-TAUGHT

"DRAWING

" One unit

"The requirement in Drawing is based upon the statement of entrance require-
ments in this subject as contained in the catalogues of colleges and universities
represented in the College Entrance Examination Board.

"The candidate's preparation in drawing should be directed
toward training him in accurate observation and in definite and
truthful representation of form, without attempt to represent
color or color values.

"The candidate should be able to show correctly and with
lines of good quality simple form in correct perspective in the
size in which it is felt in the plane of the drawing, or larger or
smaller. It is recommended that pupils should be taught to
draw from the object itself rather than from the flat.

"Correctness of proportion and accuracy in the angles and
curves and structural relations of the parts of every object drawn
are of the highest importance.

"The elementary principles of perspective are to be thoroughly
learned, and the candidate should be able to apply them in free-
hand drawing from the object or from the imagination.

"No definite prescription as to method of teaching is made.
The examination will test the preparation of the candidate in
the following points:

"1. Ability to sketch from the object with reasonable correct-
ness as to proportion, structure, and form. It is rec-
ommended that the subjects drawn include simple
geometrical objects and simple natural objects such as
living plant forms.
"2. Ability to sketch free-hand from dictation with reasonable
accuracy any simple geometrical figure or combination
of figures.
"3. Ability to represent accurately in perspective a simple
geometrical solid of which projection drawings are
given, and ability to make consistent projection draw-
ings of a simple geometrical solid of which a perspective
representation is given.
"4. Ability to answer questions in regard to the principles

involved in making these drawings."
267. The above report is a hopeful promise for the future,
for students who meet these requirements must have all the
industrial and scientific training planned by Walter Smith and
also the power to draw free-hand from objects.

The letter conforms to general belief in advising against object

STATE LAWS ON DRAWING 191

drawing in the Grammar Schools and the representation of color
values in light and shade study.

In view of the difficulty of doing such work honestly by present
methods this advice seemed necessary, but if the authors of this
letter could have seen the children pictured in Fig. 75 at work
their opinion would have been different.

If they could have seen the production of the Frontispiece
they would have realized that the Painting Glass makes it easier
to represent all light and shade and color appearances than it is
to work conventionally by any plan that divorces the representa-
tion from the true appearance.

Either the drawing lesson means that we are teaching pupils
to see truly, or that we are teaching them not to see at all. Un-
fortunately this latter is the result of much instruction now given
and, until the effort for conventional modes of expression ceases
and it is realized that truth is easier and more interesting than
conventions, little progress can be made.

268. Madame Cave's Method. — The aversion toward object
and industrial drawing is not a new thing, and neither is the
method of this book entirely new, as will appear from the follow-
ing, written by Eugene Delacroix, which appeared in the Revue
des Deux Mondes, Sept. 15, 1850, as a review of Madame Cave's
book "Drawing Without a Master":

"This is the only method of drawing which really teaches
anything. . . .

"Can we wonder at the general aversion toward the study of
drawing? Madame Cave, however, as she says in her preface,
would have this study like reading and writing form one of the
elements of education, by suppressing all false methods, and
rendering instruction not only systematic but easy. . . .

"But how shall we learn to draw? . . . Where shall time be
found for the long apprenticeship in which the great masters
spent their lives, and that in the absence of all methods? For
there really is none in the study of drawing. . . . The best master
can do no more than place a model before his pupil, telling him
to copy it as well as he can.

"A knowledge of nature resulting from long experience gives
to the finished painter a certain skill in the process . . . ; but
instinct still remains to him a surer guide than reason. This
is why the great masters never stopped to give precepts upon the
art they practised so well. . . .

"Madame Cave's sole aim is to cultivate the eye correctly.
Thanks to her method, which is simplicity itself, proportion,
contour, and grace will come of themselves and appear on the
paper or the canvas. By means of a tracing made upon trans-

192 DRAWING AND PAINTING SELF-TAUGHT

parent gauze from the object to be represented, her pupil cannot
help acquiring a knowledge of foreshortening, that stumbling-
block in all kinds of drawing. She accustoms the mind to all
the absurdities and impossibilities it presents. By requiring the
repetition from memory of the outline she gradually familiarizes
the beginner with difficulties; this calls in science to the aid of
growing experience, and at the same time opens to the pupil
the career of composition, which would be forever closed without
the assistance of drawing from memory. . . ."

269. Madame Cave had no crayon that would draw on clear
glass, so she used thin cloth stretched upon a sliding frame that
was held upon an easel. The device was so large and expensive
that only one could be provided for a class, but the results were
so remarkable that the Minister of the Interior requested the
Inspector General of Fine Arts to report upon the method. The
following is taken from this report signed in 1851 by Felix
Coitereau:

270. French Government Report. — " Tracing a drawing or
some object in nature seen through a thin gauze; reproducing
the traced image by eye alone and ascertaining by means of the
tracing if the reproduction is exact — this is the starting point
of this method. . . .

"This first exercise is followed by drawing from memory;
the pupil is required to reproduce without the aid of the model
(or the tracing) the drawing which she has previously made and
traced. ... I have established the following results:

"1. A remarkable correctness in the ensemble and contour

of a figure or any other subject.
"2. A reproduction from memory scarcely distinguishable

from the original drawing.
"3. Acquaintance with the masters.

"4. Finally, the idea of perspective; that is, that without

having learned any of the rules of the science, pupils

execute correctly the greatest difficulties in the art of

perspective foreshortening.

"Thus by exercising the memory of children, giving accuracy

of vision and firmness of hand at the age when their organs, still

tender, are docile, Madame Cave renders them better qualified

for the industrial professions, makes them skillful instruments

in all the trades which pertain to art.

"With the old methods one could not learn to draw before the
age of twelve . . . because the judgment is not developed.
With the ingenious teaching of Madame Cave the child of eight
years learns almost unconsciously to observe and compare, to
form his own judgment and at the same time to acquire that

STATE LAWS ON DRAWING 193

skill which is indispensable in every species of manual labor.
Here, then, we have genuine improvement in the education of
the children. . . ."

271. This opinion should refute the arguments of those who
claim that drawing will benefit only the few who follow art as a
profession, but I also wish to quote a few sentences from the
sermon, "Blessed be Drudgery" by Rev. William C. Gannett,
.since of all studies drawing is the one which best develops the
qualities named by Mr. Gannett as essential for success :

272. Blessed be Drudgery. — "Our prime elements are due to
our drudgery, — I mean that literally, the fundamentals, that
underlie all fineness and without which no other culture worth
the winning is even possible. These, for instance, — and what
names are more familiar? — power of attention, power of industry,
promptitude in beginning work, method and accuracy and de-
spatch in doing work; perseverance, courage before difficulties,
cheer under straining burdens, self-control and self-denial and
temperance. These are the prime qualities; these the funda-
mentals.

"Again, then, I say, let us sing a hallelujah and make a fresh
beatitude to Drudgery: Blessed be Drudgery! it is the one thing
that we cannot spare.

"This is a hard gospel, is it not? But now there is a pleasanter
word to briefly say. To lay the firm foundations in ourselves,
or even to win success in life, we must be drudges, — that I take
for granted now. But we can be artists, also, in our daily task.
And at that word things brighten.

"'Artists,' I say, not artisans. The difference? This: the
artist is he who strives to perfect his work, — the artisan strives
to get through it. The artist would fain finish, too; but with
him it is to 'finish the work God has given me to do!' It is not
how great the thing we do, but how well we do it, that puts us in
the noble brotherhood of artists.

"A third time and heartily I say it, — 'Blessed be Drudgery!'
For thrice it blesses us; it gives us the fundamental qualities of
manhood and womanhood; it gives us success in the thing we
have to do; and it makes us, if we choose, artists, — artists within,
whatever our outward work may be. Blessed be Drudgery, —
the secret of all Culture."

EDUCATION FOR THE TALENTED.

273. Talented Unable to Study. — I was appointed to the
Faculty of the Normal Art School in 1882 at the age of twenty.
Since then I have met thousands of students and have often

194 DRAWING AND PAINTING SELF-TAUGHT

found that those who continue art school study lack the interest
and ability of many who are financially unable to enter an art
school. Therefore I wish to propose a simple way to aid talented
students to develop power by home study.

Figs. 93 and 94 reproduce home work by two High School
boys who used the Drawing Glass in connection with the Uni-
versity Extension Course in Free-hand Drawing. At the time
these drawings were made this course was restricted to five
criticisms, but as these could extend over a full year great gain
was possible. This is seen on comparing the faulty armchair in
Fig. 93 with the well-drawn and difficult street scene. The boy
who made these drawings was unable to continue art study
beyond the five lessons given by the State. The boy whose
work is shown by Fig. 94 took up newspaper illustrating and
finally saved enough to attend an art school.

274. The Talented should be Aided to Study.— The draw-
ings made by these boys while in High School are much better
than average art school results, and students of such ability who
can not afford to enter art schools should be aided to do all they
can at home, and then they should be assisted to study in some
good art school.

By home study of this book and a criticism once in two or
three months of the results produced by the aid of the Drawing
and Painting Glass such students could learn to draw and paint
at home better than many art school students do after several
years of study. (See the Frontispiece.)

Students of ability thus taught would so raise the standards in
art schools that the weak and frivolous students would drop out
of their own volition, or be dropped because there would be room
for only the serious students. Thus standards would be raised
in art schools and in professional life.

In France the talented student is assisted, and he must be
in America if we are to lead in industry or the arts. This can
be done by any art school that will apply the methods of this
book to aid home students to overcome the crudities of un-
trained vision.

275. Home Study Class of the School of the Museum of Fine
Arts, Boston. — Since object drawing has not been taught in the
public schools, students have entered art schools entirely un-
prepared to do the truthful drawing formerly demanded. Many
art schools have lowered their standards to retain their students,
and therefore many students who desire to do the best are mis-
directed.

The School of the Museum of Fine Arts is an exception, for
now as always it demands the exact drawing and truthful painting

Fig. 93. — Drawings from home study class made by a high school

boy. The first was made before use of the Glass. The lower was

sent for the fifth criticism after nine months' use of the Glass.

196 DRAWING AND PAINTING SELF-TAUGHT

which have prepared so many of its graduates to take first rank.
But in recent years the work in this school became more difficult
for both instructors and students, and so when the Faculty found
that the methods of this book were proving more successful for
beginners the School at once adopted them for the still life and
perspective classes.

A year's trial having proven that untrained beginners may
make rapid progress in both drawing and painting, the School
established a Home Study Class, and the Circular for 1922 states
that "pupils who have done successfully a year's work in this
class before entering the school may expect to be advanced more
rapidly and thus shorten their school course."

Art schools that believe in the old masters' methods, and try
to secure truthful drawing and painting, must be interested in
the method that caused the above statement to be made, for it
holds out the hope that in spite of bad elementary instruction
the art school student may now gain true vision so quickly as
to have time for memory drawing, composition, and other es-
sential problems that are crowded out when drawing must be
studied by the old methods.

276. Art School Home Study Classes. — Any art school may
improve the standards of its classes by forming a Home Study
Class, and advising students to learn to draw and paint still life
by closely following the methods of this book for a year or more
of home study before entering the school.

The University Extension Course of Massachusetts now offers
criticisms in outline drawing only, based on the use of the Drawing
Glass. This barely starts the average student, but the State
can do no more, and art school study assisted by the State will
not be possible for many years, if ever.

Such a course in outline is, however, not enough to interest
most students with artistic power, for it demands too much
practice from uninteresting subjects before the students can
realize the need for it or the value of it. A few talented students
may persevere and accomplish results such as those of Figs. 93 and
94, but many students of ability will fail to continue unless the
Painting Glass is provided, and the study of drawing and paint-
ing carried on together.

This method supplants theories and conventional corresponds
ence instruction with independent and exact observation and
self-discovery of mistakes, and will permit thousands in remote
places to gain skill of eye and hand that otherwise would be
unable to profit by good instruction.

The serious student will find the Glass so helpful that there
may not be need for more than three or four criticisms the first

i t

Lt\ w" c.n c p fV^a-ss.

J&siXLlJuiamJto^riuiLifc.

-i -2a- Hours.

Fig. 94. — Drawings from home study class made by a high school

boy seventeen years old. These drawings were sent for the filth

criticism after a year's use of the Glass.

198 DRAWING AND PAINTING SELF-TAUGHT

year. Thus self-taught progress will be rapid and inexpensive,
and even if paintings were sent for criticism monthly, the expense
would be but a small part of that required for many corre-
spondence courses whose value may be indicated by the minus
sign.

Those who do not understand this method may oppose it. but
the artists and art schools that teach honestly must realize that
it will do more to aid art and the artist than any other influence.

When all public school graduates are able, as they should be,
to draw and paint simple subjects with the artist's vision for
truth, the public will judge art on its merit and be eager to rec-
ognize and support the few artists with real genius who will
then follow art as a creative profession rather than as merely a
descriptive or a representative trade.

277. Prizes for Home Study. — Instruction can be given in
such a Home Study Class for a small part of the fee demanded
by many schools that promise much and do little except provide
copies, theories, and technical training that are worthless to
those who can not draw by sight from nature.

When it is known that the best art school instruction is pro-
vided for such home students, and that the self-criticism gained
from use of the Glass is better for the beginner than personal
criticism from any artist, there should result a profit that will
in time establish a fund to aid talented and needy students to
attend the school.

Wherever the value of such a Home Study Class is proven, it is
believed that gifts and bequests may be provided to enable all
needy students who have shown their exceptional ability to
attend the art school.

The prizes established to aid the most talented and best-
prepared students to study in the art school classes after all
possible home progress has been made should not be enough for
full support, and should be given as a loan to be repaid with
small interest when the student is able.

This idea offers more for the money required than any other,
and should appeal to those who wish to benefit the race by an
education that can be dispensed without danger of injuring those
who profit by it. If the sacrifices and privations borne by art
students in order to continue study could be known there would
be an instant response to this appeal which would enable the
talented to gain the training they can not secure now.

REFERENCE BOOKS 199

REFERENCE BOOKS.

Before studying these books the following paragraph from
"Lectures and Lessons in Art" by F. W. Moody* should be con-
sidered:

"If you wish to succeed as an artist, waste no time in theories
. . . study not the words of critics but the works of the old masters
— these alone will enable you to form a sound, broad and liberal
judgment. There is good in all styles; use principles for your
own guidance, not to condemn others. Talk little, do much,
and you will acquire by work and observation a taste and power
which will enable you to form a style of your own, free from an
exaggerated regard for material on one hand, or from a reckless
bravura of execution on the other. Always mistrust those who
prove any particular art is wrong; and when an artist has a
theory, you may be pretty sure it is only a cloak for his own
deficiencies. Artists are particularly ingenious in this sort of
self-deception; but nothing is a greater impediment in the race
for true excellence than this. Leave them to their own ideas
and beat them."

The above advice was intended for artists, and those who
wish to draw and paint well should follow it until their eyes are
true for nature's effects.

When study of this book and use of the Glass have given you
true eyes you should read and observe widely to realize that
though the painters' efforts to-day to represent transient effects
of light and color constitute the latest and most difficult feat of
vision, it is by no means to be judged the height of art attainment.
In fact, you may be a master in representing appearances and yet
fail to be an artist.

For this reason I have included books with many and con-
flicting opinions on art. Study them as you study pictures in
order to evolve your own theories and your own methods, and
try to realize that the other fellow may be as honest and as suc-
cessful in his ideals as you are even when his viewpoint and re-
sults are opposed to yours.

ART AND ARCHITECTURE.

A History of Art. Giulio Carotti. $5.00.

A History of Ornament. A. D. F. Hamlin. $5.00.

Apollo. A general history of the plastic arts. S. Reinach. $2.00.

Art for Art's Sake. John C. Van Dyke. $2.50.

Artist and Public. Kenyon Cox. $2.50.

Architecture for General Readers. H. H. Statham.

200 DRAWING AND PAINTING SELF-TAUGHT

Art Education Scholastic and Industrial. Walter Smith.

A Short -History of Art. Julia B. De Forest. $4.50.

Concerning Painting. Kenyon Cox. $2.50.

Considerations on Painting. John La Farge.

History of Art. Goodyear. $3.00.

Lectures and Lessons on Art. F. W. Moody.

Mural Painting in America. E. R. Blashfield.

Old Masters and New. Kenyon Cox. $3.00.

Outlines for the Study of Art. H. H. Powers. $3.00.

Photographs from Old Masters. (Reference only.) Braun.

Reproductions of Old Masters' Drawings, such as the Dutch Masters

by H. Kleinman.
Royal Academy Lectures on Art. George Clausen.
Six Lectures on Painting. George Clausen. $2.50.
Ten O'Clock. J. M. Whistler.

The Appreciation of Architecture. Russell Sturgis.
The Architecture of Colonial America. Eberlein. $3.50.
The Classic Point of View. Kenyon Cox.
The Higher Life in Art. John La Farge.
The Fine Arts. Baldwin 'Brown.
The World's Painters. D. L. Hoyt. $2.00.
University Prints. Bureau of University Travel, Boston.

ANATOMY.

Anatomical Diagrams. James M. Dunlop. $2.50.

Art Anatomy. William Rimmer. $20.00.

Figure Drawing and Composition. R. G. Hatton. $5.00.

Human Anatomy for Art Students. Sir Alfred D. Fripp. $4.50.

The Human Figure. Vanderpoel. $2.75.

Tree Structure. Rex Vicat Cole. $4.50.

COLOR.

A Color Notation. Albert H. Munsell. $1.50.
Chemistry of Color. Church.
Color Study. Anson K. Cross. 90 cents.
Text-book of Color. Ogden N. Rood.

DESIGN AND COMPOSITION.

A Discussion of Composition. Van Pelt. $2.25.

A Manual of Decorative Composition. Henri Mayeux.

Nature the Raw Material of Ornament. L. F. Day. $3.00.

Ornament and its Application. L. F. Day.

Ornament the Finished Product of Nature. L. F. Day. $3.75.

Pattern Designing. L. F. Day. $3.00.

Pictorial Composition. H. R. Poore. $4.00.

Practical Hints on Composition in Painting. John Burnett.

The Principles of Design. E. A. Batchelder. $4.00.

DRAWING AND PAINTING.

Applied Drawing. Harold H. Brown. $1.50.

Brush and Pencil Notes in Landscape. Sir Alfred East, R.A. $3.75.

Drawing for Art Students and Illustrators. A. W. Seaby. $3.75.

REFERENCE BOOKS 201

Drawing from Memory and Mind Picturing. R. Catterson-Smith. $3.00.

Landscape Painting. Birge Harrison. $2.50.

Learning to Draw. Viollet-le-Duc.

Letters to a Painter. Ostwald (translated). $1.25.

Light and Shade. Anson K. Cross. $1.50. 7

Materials of the Painter's Craft. A. P. Laurie. $1.50.

On Drawing and Painting. Denman W. Ross. $3.50.

Painting and the Personal Equation. Charles H. Woodbury. $2.00.

Pen Drawing. Charles D. Maginnis. $1.50.

The Art of Landscape Painting in Oil Colors. Sir Alfred East. $4.50.

The Painters Palette. Denman W. Ross. $1.50.

The Practice and Science of Drawing. Harold Speed. $4.50.

The Practice of Oil Painting. Solomon V. Solomon, R.A. $4.50.

The Training of the Memory in Art. L. De Boisbaudran. $3.00.

Technique of Painting. Charles Moreau-Vauthier.

Tone Relations in Painting. Arthur Pope. $1.50.

PERSPECTIVE AND TECHNICAL.

Alphabets Old and New. L. F. Day. $3.00.

Costume Design and Home Planning. Izor. $1.00.

Elements of Perspective. Henry Lewis.

Free-hand Perspective Theory. Anson K. Cross. $1.25.

Introductory Course in Mechanical Drawing. J. C. Tracy. $1.80.

Interior Decoration. F. Alvah Parsons. $4.00.

Letters and Lettering. Frank C. Brown. $3.00.

Mechanical Drawing. Anson K. Cross. $1.50.

Modern Perspective. W. R. Ware. $4.50.

Model and Object Drawing in American Text-books of Art Educa-
tion. Walter Smith.

Nature's Laws and the Making of Pictures. W. L. Wyllie. $6.00.

Perspective in American Text-books of Art Education. Walter
Smith.

Perspective as Applied to Pictures. Rex Vicat Cole. $4.50.

Perspective Sketches from Working Drawings. F. E. Mathewson.

Perspective for Art Students. R. G. Hatton. $3.00.

Photo Engraving Primer. Horgan. 75 cents.

Printing for School and Shop. F. S. Henry. $1.50.

Problems in Mechanical Drawing. C. A. Bennett. $1.00.

Writing, Illuminating and Lettering. Edward Johnston. $3.50.

Other books may be as helpful as those named, and the student need not
feel restricted to this list.

The prices given are changing often, and some of the books are out of print
and to be found only in libraries.

202 DRAWING AND PAINTING SELF-TAUGHT

APPROVED BY PAINTERS, SCULPTORS, EDUCATORS.

Adams, Herbert, Sculptor. — "It is a most valuable aid for beginners."

Andrew, Richard, Painter, Instructor Normal Art School. — "Your Painting
Lenses instantly correct vision and enable beginners to record true relative
values."

Benson, FranklW., Painter. — "The Glass should be of great use to beginners
and enable a pupil to advance with little instruction."

Booth, Etta E., College of the Pacific, San Jose, Cat. — "I find it a wonderful
help and should hardly know how to do without it."

Bosley, Frederick, Painter, Instructor Museum of Fine Arts, Boston. — "After
studying with you a short time your pupils show remarkable improvement. I
approve of your methods."

Dallin, Cyrus E., Sculptor, Instructor Normal Art School. — "The results you
have achieved are a most striking testimonial to the value of the Drawing
Glass."

De Camp, Joseph, Painter. — *T have never seen in my long years of teaching
such remarkable results as those you have obtained by use of the Drawing
Glass."

Deem, Mary G., State Normal School, Valley City, No. Dak. — "I am as
enthusiastic as ever. My students, who never drew before, are amazed at
their own progress. It should sell as a part of every school equipment."

George, Vesper L., Painter, Instructor Normal Art School. — "The never-
ending testimonies of your students, and many years of observation impel me
to give with pleasure my unqualified approval of the clearness and efficiency
of your methods."

Grafly, Charles, Sculptor, Pennsylvania Academy of Fine Arts, Philadelphia^
Pa. — "Your teaching, in a way almost beyond belief, enables the beginner to
gain a sure eye and touch. Your method in the study of drawing and painting
is the most practical I have ever known. When those in charge of public,
elementary, and art schools see the wisdom of such a course, — as they must
when it is realized that the proper use of the Drawing and Painting Glass is
not mechanical but merely a means to an end, — then the student will be better
equipped to see, and, to see, after all, is one of the greatest things we are able
to teach."

Hale, Philip L., Painter, Instructor Museum of Fine Arts, Boston. — "Your
results from beginners are surprising. I am pleased to recommend the
Glass."

Hamilton, Wilbur Dean, Painter, Instructor Normal Art School. — "Your re-
sults from the entering class are extraordinary.' *

Hazard, Arthur M., Painter.— "Your Painting Lenses are a most valuable
aid in discerning color relations and values and your Drawing Glass teaches
the principles of correct observation in the simplest manner."

TESTIMONIALS 203

Hibbard, Aldro T., Painter. — "The Glass is (of infinite value to students
and painters desiring speed and correct vision. We owe much to Mr. Cross for
his interest and perseverance in the advancement of honest art education."

James, William, Painter, Instructor Museum of Fine Arts, Boston. — "The
results from your pupils after a few months are sufficient testimony of the
value of your methods. I know of no other as good."

Jones, H. Bolton, Painter, New York. — "The Glass commends itself to me
for the ease with which a student can compare his own work with the object."

MacNeil, Hermon A., Sculptor, New York. — "I am convinced through
trial that your Glasses are of great value in training the student to see and
represent accurately. To me its chief value is its striking effect on the mind
of the pupil, for it proves with his eyes and not with his teacher's, thus disarm-
ing doubt and insuring progress."

Major, Ernest L., Painter, Instructor Normal Art School, Boston. — "The
artistic drawings your pupils make after use of the Glass please me greatly."

Murphy, J. Francis, Painter. — "The Glass is a splendid corrective and fine
for students. I congratulate you."

Norton, Georgie L., Cleveland School of Art. — "In time all art schools will
give your Glass a place in the teaching of elementary drawing."

Nowell, Ethel K. S., Tolethorpe School, Newport, R.I. — "I am pleased to
report that the Glasses in use have produced their unconscious and definite
effect on the most wildly unseeing eyes."

Patrick, Mary L., Director of Art, Wellesley, Mass. — "The Glasses have
proved a great help to thoughtful drawing and self-reliant work by the pupils."

Paxton, William M., Painter, Boston. — "Your first-year students show
understanding that the average student gets only after long experience. It
should be used in the public schools as well as in art schools."

Peabody, Robert S., Peabody & Stearns, Architects, Boston. — "Teachers
should welcome your Glass which substitutes absolute proof for their opinions
and is not a get-rich-quick method."

Randall, Asa G., Commonwealth Art Colony, Boothbay Harbor, Me. — "It is
the quickest way to teach the appearance of objects that I have ever tried.
Pupils get more interested when they learn to draw so rapidly."

Robinson, William S., Painter, New York. — "I heartily recommend your
Glass, which cannot fail to be of the greatest assistance to both teacher and
student in elementary art study."

Ross, Denman W., Harvard University. — "I have used your Drawing Glass
in my classes and have urged other teachers to use it. It should be used in the
schools wherever free-hand drawing is taught. It will be helpful to the
teachers as well as the scholar."

Sargent, John S., Painter. — "Frequent use of the Glass will put one on guard
against any habitual error."

Tarbell, Edmund C, Painter, Instructor Corcoran Gallery, Washington,
D.C. — "The Glass is the best aid to drawing ever made. I wish it could be
adopted by every school in the land."

204 DRAWING AND PAINTING SELF-TAUGHT

Taylor, W. L., Painter, Wellesley. — "I am glad to say your Glass is a very
good thing. Please send me another for a child in whom I am interested."

Varney, Charles E., Superintendent of] Schools, Gray, Me. — "One could not
believe such results possible unless he saw the actual work both at the beginning
of the term and now. The Glass will be a missionary to rural sections."

Vonnoh, Robert W., Painter, New York. — "The use of your Glass revolu-
tionizes the matter of drawing to such an extent that when the Glass is laid
aside nearly all the drawings in a class of over one hundred seem evenly correct.
Every school and every student would be benefited by its use."

Walker, C. Howard, Architect, Director School of Design, Boston. — "The
best aid to observation I have seen, being direct, sensible, and simple. The
results from its use are remarkable."

Journal of Education. — "This is one of the most important and significant
revolutionary or evolutionary aids to drawing. In its line it is as distinct a
discovery as those which have made men famous in science. It develops an
eye for perspective and makes the artistically brainless, brainy in the use of
eye and hand."

School Arts Magazine. — "If you think you can draw an object correctly
free-hand, this device will 'get the laugh on you' before you draw your breath
a second time. If you think you cannot draw, it will teach you how. Equip
your students with the Glass if you want to see astonishing results.

"Miss Cross has proven that when the Glass is rightly used for correcting
vision the average grammar school graduate can draw better than those sup-
posed to be geniuses."

THE SCHOOL OF THE MUSEUM OF FINE ARTS
HOME STUDY CLASS IN DRAWING AND PAINTING

This class offers the home student the first opportunity to
obtain the best art school instruction based on the use of the
Cross Drawing and Painting Glass.

The following is from the School Circular for 1922:—

"Sound and rapid progress is possible by a new method of self-criticism,
but only as the reward of diligent study from nature in place of copies and

"Pupils who have done successfully a year's work in this class before enter-
ing the School may expect to be advanced more rapidly, and thus shorten

"ISn apply to-Home Study Class, School of the Museum
of Fine Arts, Boston, Mass."

The fee of $10.00 provides the Drawing and Painting Glass,
the book "Drawing and Painting Self-taught/' and criticisms
of drawings or paintings. Registration at any time.

LIST OF "CROSS" BOOKS AND MATERIALS.

Drawing Glass, Mailing Case, and Crayons $1-25

Painting Glass, Mailing Case, and Crayons 2.50

(It is also a Drawing Glass)

Painting Lenses (adjustable in finder with spirit-level) 1-75

-Cross" Crayons 12, 30 cts.; 36, 75 cts.; gross, 2.50

Drawing and Painting Self-taught 3-00

Drawing and Painting Self-taught and the Drawing and Paint-

ing Glass

Free-hand Perspective Theory j-*j>

Light and Shade *

Mechanical Drawing °

Color Study

A cheaper Drawing Glass for use in Graded Schools will be
provided in lots of 30 or more at special low prices.

Patented Oct. 15, 1912; Nov. 22, 1917; Aug. 9, 1921. Medal,
Panama-Pacific Exposition.

Order direct to avoid imitations without the spirit-level.

All sent postpaid in United States on receipt of check or money
order.

Address for materials but not for Home Study Class:

A. K. CROSS, Winthrop 52, Mass.

c,v^ -IBP' c*"a 'M
