'UATERIALS/w-

PERMANENT UAINTING

MAXIMILIAN Tbci;

D'VAN'NOSTRAND COMPANY

LIBRARY

UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA.

MATERIALS FOR
PERMANENT PAINTING

MANUFACTf DEALERS, ART

By A ilian

Member Anv

Past
Past Chairman

Director of t of Toch i

Author of th / of Mixed Pa i

Fellow of -,don

"00 d 9§b aMmm-rq .boow rro gntt-

NEW Y '.

Gesso Tempera Painting on wood, probable age 600
years.

(Painting in the possession of the author.)

MATERIALS FOR
PERMANENT PAINTING

A MANUAL FOR

MANUFACTURERS, ART DEALERS, ARTISTS
AND COLLECTORS

By Maximilian Toch

Member American Institute Chemical Engineers
Municipal Lecturer on Paints, Colors, Etc., College of the

City of New York
Past President of the Chemists' Club

Past Chairman Society Chemical Industry N. Y. Section

Director of Chemical Laboratory of Toch Brothers

Author of the Chemistry of Mixed Paints, Etc.

Fellow of the Chemical Society of London

Etc., Etc.

NEW YORK

D. VAN NOSTRAND COMPANY

COPYRIGHT 1911

BY

D. VAN NOSTRAND COMPANY

The Eddy Press Corporation
Cumberland. Md.

Contents

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Preface.

Chapter

I,

History of Painting.

Chapter

II,

Pigments used by the Ancients.

Chapter

HI,

Sinopia, the Search for the Mas-

ters' secret.

Chapter

IV,

Photo-Chemical Deterioration of

Oil Paintings.

Chapter

V,

Cause of the Cracking of Paintings

and the Remedies.

Chapter

VI,

Canvas, Wood and Metal as Foun-

dations.

Chapter

VII,

Preparation of Canvas in Commer-
cial Practice.

Chapter

VIII,

Renovation and Cleaning of Pic-

tures.

Chapter

IX,

The School of Impressionism.

Chapter

x,

Volatile Solvents.

Chapter

XI,

Picture Varnishes.

Chapter

XII,

Driers.

Chapter

XIII,

Linseed Oil and Other Drying Oils.

Chapter

XIV,

Classification of the Pigments and

their Description.

Chapter

XV,

The Permanent Colors.

Chapter

XVI,

Pigments Dangerous to Health.

Chapter

XVII,

Pigments affected by Coal Smoke,

etc.

Chapter

XVIII,

Water in Tube Colors.

Chapter

XIX,

Pigments which are Permanent,

etc.

Chapter

XX,

Pigments which Dry Slowly.

Chapter

XXI,

The failure of Sir J. Reynold's

Paintings.

Permanent Painting

LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS

Page
Gesso Tempera Painting on Wood Frontispiece

Photo-Micrograph of a Section of an Oil Paint-
ing Showing Cracks 40

The Engineering Features of a Painting at Rest. . 42

Photo- Micrograph of Cracks in a Painting, and
Dirt and Dust Encysted in the Varnish 45

Painting on Mahogany Panel Showing Serious
Cracks Produced by Varnishing the Picture Be-
fore the Underlying Coat was Sufficiently Dry. . 48

Photo-Micrograph of Cracks Invisible to the Naked
Eye Showing Encysted Matter and Fissures. . . 63

Photograph of an Oil Painting Showing Serious
Cracking Throughout, Due to the Contraction of
the Paint 80

High-power Photo-micrograph of Flake White
which Contains too much Water in its Composi-
tion 185

P r e f a c e

PREFACE

IN the course of my acquaintance with artistic
painters, I was astonished to find the enormous
amount of ignorance that exists among them as
to the composition of the materials which they use
and the science of painting. Almost every painter of
note will tell you what a great pity it is that the
science of making colors is lost, and that the ancient
painters and great masters were so successful primar-
ily because their pigments and materials were far su-
perior to those which we can obtain to-day. This
statement is so diametrically opposed to the facts
that I have been prompted to make a study of paint
pigments in order to throw some light on this sub-
ject, and demonstrate to the painter that the colors
of to-day are far superior to the colors used by the
ancients, and show that the principal fault lies with
the manufacturer, who makes fugitive colors, for the
use of which there is no scientific nor commercial rea-
son. Almost any large dealer in artists' colors has
upwards of 200 pigments on sale. In the first place,
no palette could hold any such quantity, and in the
second place, there are possibly only 10 or 15 sufficient-
ly permanent pigments to warrant their use.

The correct, complete and most edifying book on

P r e f a c e

this subject has never been written, nor is my effort
of much value, excepting perhaps from the stand-
point of the chemist. Some day there will be born
a man, who will be both a color chemist and a painter,
and that man will write the ideal book on the subject.
The popular impression is that all chemists must have
a comprehensive knowledge of the chemistry of pig-
ments, but this is not true, as there are very few chem-
ists who know anything about the technology of
paints, because it is a specialty which very few have
worked up, and no matter how proficient a chemist
may be, if he is not an artistic painter, he cannot
advise how a sky should be painted, or what particular
greens to use for foliage and shadows. The technique
of the fine arts is a subject by itself, and while I may
be supposed to have some knowledge on this sub-
ject, I frankly admit my inability to paint, but in-
asmuch as I feel very certain of one part of my sub-
ject, that is the physical and chemical properties of
the pigments, I do not hesitate to recommend in plain
language exactly what the painter shall do with refer-
ence to his colors, and the materials upon which he
paints.

Furthermore, I was very much astonished to find
that in the art schools of the various countries no at-
tention whatever is paid to the chemistry of colors.
A painter should be aware that certain pigments are
affected by the fumes arising from vegetables in a
dining room, and that these fumes form chemical com-

P r e f a c e

pounds with certain pigments, and a painter should
likewise know that the atmosphere of large cities is
contaminated with acid gases which are absent in
smaller places, and which did not exist before the age
of the burning of coal as fuel.

I trust, therefore, that my work will be taken serious-
ly, and that the poorer painter will recognize that he
need not use expensive colors to produce permanent
results. I am glad that I am not actuated by any com-
mercial motive in writing this book, for, although I
have been a color manufacturer for many years, I have
never made, nor have I the intention of making tube
colors for artists' use, but I have made quantities of
finely ground colors for many of my friends, who are
painters, and have demonstrated to them that some-
times the ordinary paints ground in oil, such as are
used by house decorators, are sufficiently good for
many purposes, and in many instances produce the
same results as the more expensive colors filled in
tubes. I have tried to write as fully as I know and
give as plainly as I could the description relating to
the more expensive colors, condemning those which
should be condemned, and recommending others as
long as there is nothing superior to be had.

It may interest the reader to know why I take such
a positive stand with reference to the fading, drying
and other physical characteristics of colors, in view
of the fact that the majority of investigators vacillate
continually.

Preface

In 1886, while I was still a chemical student, I
made my first investigation of tube colors, and from
that day to this I have been interested in the subject
of the manufacture of paints and pigments as a vo-
cation, and have always been interested in the sub-
ject of the application of artistic pigments as an avo-
cation. Drying tests can, of course, be conducted in
a few weeks, but extensive tests take years, and al-
though it is reasonable to determine the permanency
of a color by exposure to the bright sunshine for
three months, I have made experiments along these
lines which have involved exposure for over five years.

When pigments are mixed with an aqueous medium
containing a little gum, and the resulting picture is
hermetically sealed, no decomposition takes place, be-
cause the majority of chemical reactions cease in the
absence of moisture, but linseed oil or varnish medium
will generate moisture and certain gases, producing a
slow decomposition, so that it often takes years to
make a determination of which a description can be
written in a few minutes.

It is a great pleasure for me to acknowledge the
assistance I received from Dr. George F. Kunz, who
gave me a fairly complete collection of semi-precious
minerals, all of which represented the pigments used
by the ancients and with which I conducted many of
my experiments.

Permanent Painting

CHAPTER I
THE HISTORY OF PAINTING

THE decorative art of using colors is probably as
old as man. We have the instinctive effort of
the barbarian, who bedecked his body with col-
ored earths, and we have the frescoes and wall decora-
tions and the painting of the columns in the temples
of Luxor and Karnak, as evidence of the use of pig-
ments for decorative purposes. There seems to be
little doubt that from the earliest day of decorative
painting down to the fourteenth century, the media
used consisted of some albuminous or gelatinous com-
pound mixed with water. The white of egg or the
entire egg mixed with lime was evidently the prin-
cipal medium used to fasten colors, although many
other substances were used, such as the liquid ob-
tained by boiling parchment and the skins of animals
in water, which is practically the same thing as using
glue.

In the method of painting with the white of egg
which has always been known as tempera, the paint
was generally applied to a ground of gesso, which is
the Italian word for gypsum, or plaster of Paris, and
the pigments which were used, and the methods of

Permanent Painting

preparation of the wood foundations for painting
were so perfect that absolutely no decomposition takes
place in gesso tempera painting, for we have brilliant
examples that are over 600 years old practically in
their pristine condition. Pliny mentions the use of
milk as a medium, and while it is doubtful whether
we have any authentic samples of early paintings with
milk, we have the custom still in vogue, for there are
thousands of tons of kalsomine or water colors made
at the present day in which the binding material is
casein, which is the gluey substance that is contained
in milk. In addition to these media the early monks
used almost every conceivable substance of a sticky
nature, such as wax, honey, wine boiled until it is
slightly thickened (glucose or sugar), the juice of
various plants, and from the eighth century on we
begin to have evidence of the use of drying oils in the
form of some nut oil (more than likely linseed oil
mixed with a varnish), for in Italy before the days
of oil, we have, according to Cennini, the mention of
vernice, from which evidently our word "varnish"
has been etymologically derived.

Oils were known to the ancients as an article of
food and as a material for anointing the body, suffi-
cient evidence for this being found in the Bible, and
as many priests busied themselves with painting and
used the materials at hand, there is no doubt that
many of them used cooking oils such as olive, flax
and nut oil in many of their works. Eastlake, in his

Permanent Painting

most valuable book,* , makes the statement that Aetius,
a medical writer of the fifth and the beginning of the
sixth century, mentions at great length, a drying oil
in connection with works of art, and it was this early
writer who described at full length what we probably
recognize as "linseed oil," and after mentioning this,
he makes the statement, "walnut oil is prepared like
that of almonds, either by pounding or pressing the
nuts, or by throwing them into boiling water after
they have been bruised. It has a use besides a medi-
cinal use, being applied by gilders or encaustic painters,
for it dries, and preserves gildings and encaustic
paints for a long time."

The popular statement that the brothers Hubert and
Jan Van Eyck were the first to paint permanent
pictures in oil, is only true in so far that both of these
men evidently investigated all the work that had been
previously done, as the Italian historian, Facius, speaks
of Van Eyck as having consulted the previous author-
ities with much profit, t Facius, whose full name was
Bartolommeo Facio, appears to have first published
his work in 1456, but we have ample evidence as far
back as Henry III, in 1239, showing that oil painting
was practiced in England as a trade. In view of the
fact that the work by Sir Charles Eastlake is to be.
found in few libraries, and that his celebrated book is
therefore not easily accessible, I quote from his in-

* Materials for a History of Oil Painting.

t Eastlake's Material for the History of Oil Painting, p. 25.

Permanent Painting

vestigations as follows: "In 1239 (23d of Henry
III) oil is mentioned in connexion with painting. Sim-
ilar notices appear in numerous account- rolls belong-
ing to the reign of Edward I, viz., from 1274 to 1295 ;
and in others dated 1307, the 1st of Edward II."

Another series exists in the records of Ely Cathedral,
the dates extending from 1325 to 1351. A great
number of the same kind are preserved in accounts
belonging to the reign of Edward III, and relating
to the decoration of St. Stephen's Chapel, from 1352
to 1358. Partial translations (unfortunately without
the original text) of some of the last-mentioned
records have been published in " Smith's Antiquities
of Westminster."* The extracts made by that writer
relate to glass-painting, architecture, and decorations
generally. Of certain weekly accounts (belonging to
the reign of Edward I), amounting originally to one
hundred and forty-two in number, he states that he
had found eleven only, t In the course of a recent
investigation forty-four have been discovered. How-
ever interesting in other points of view, these numer-
ous documents throw but little light on the practice
of oil painting. The same materials constantly re-
appear, but there is no direct allusion to their use,
except as regards the process of varnishing. Such
passages as the following refer to the commonest
operations of this kind: "To the same (Stephen Le

Permanent Painting

Joigneur) for varnishing two coffers, 8d.";* and else,
"To Richard de Assheby for preparing with white,
covering with ochre, and varnishing the King's Cham-
ber, according to contract. 32 shillings." t A few
specimens of the mandates and accounts above ad-
verted to, beginning with those of the thirteenth cen-
tury, will therefore suffice. The first in order of time
is familiar to many, having been originally published
by Walpole.

1239. "The King to his treasurer and chamber-
lains. Pay from our treasury to Odo the goldsmith
and Edward his son one hundred and seventeen shil-
lings and ten-pence for oil, varnish, and colours bought,
and for pictures executed in the Queen's Chamber
at Westminster, from the octaves of the Holy Trinity
(May 25th) in the 23rd year of our reign, to the
feast of St. Barnabas (June nth) in the same year,
namely, for fifteen days." $

It is here necessary to remark, in anticipation of
the inquiry respecting varnishes, that the word vernix
or vernisium, in the earlier notices of painting, does
not mean a fluid composition, but dry sandarac resin,
which, when melted and boiled with oil, formed a

* "Eidem (Stephanno le Joignur) pro vernicione ii. coffro rum Viii.

t "Richardo de Assheby pro bealbacions ocriacione et ver nacione
camere Regis ad tascham xxxii. s."

t "Rex thesauriario et camerariis suis salutem. Liberate de thesauro
nostro Odoni aurifabro et Edwardo filio sup centum et septemdecem
solidos et decem denarios pro oleo, vernici, et coloribus emptis, et
picturis factis in camera reginae nqstrae apud Westm. ab octavis Sane-
tae Trinitatis anno regni nostri xxiii. usque ad festum Sancti Barnabe
apostoli, eodem anno, scilicet per xv. dies."

Permanent Painting

varnish, in the modern sense of the term. The proofs
of this will be given hereafter. It may be sufficient
here to observe, that, in the English accounts, the
quantity of varnish is always noted by weight, and that
of oil by measure. The above passage should be
translated "for oil, sandarac resin, and colours." It
will be seen, that the order relates to the work of
fifteen days only; but it does not follow that the oil
varnish was used upon pictures, or operations in paint-
ing, then executed. In the portion of time specified
some works may have been varnished and others pre-
pared for it. The date of this mandate is a year be-
fore the birth of Cimabue.

In 1259, Master William, the painter, with his as-
sistants, received forty-three shillings and ten-pence for
painting a Jesse (no doubt the usual genealogical tree
of Christ) on the mantel-piece of the King's Chamber
(The Painted Chamber), and "for renovating and
washing the paintings on the walls of the said cham-
ber," *

This supposes that these celebrated works, consisting
chiefly of subjects from the Old Testament and from
-the Apocrypha, were varnished. Size paintings, with-
out such a protection, would hardly have been proof
against this "ablution." The tempera, composed chief-
ly of yolk of egg, is firmer than size, and becomes
very solid in time; but the colored remains of the

* "Magistro Willelmo Pictori cum hominibus suis circa Jesse in
Mantell, camini Regis depingendum et circa picturam parietum ipsius
camere Regis innovandam et abluendam, xliii. s. x. d."

Permanent Painting

Painted Chamber (the varnish probably having be-
come decomposed from damp during the lapse of
ages) easily yielded to the sponge when they were
examined in 1819. *

In the period from 1274 to 1277 (3rd to 5th of
Edward I), an account, apparently relating to the
Painted Chamber, contains the following items: "To
Reymund, for seventeen Ib. of white lead, ii. s. x. d.
To the same, for sixteen gallons (?) of oil, xvi. s. To
the same, for twenty-four tb. of varnish, xii. s. To
Hugo le Vespunt, for eighteen gallons of oil, xxxi. s.,';
etc. t Again: "To Reymund, for a hundred (Leaves)
of gold, iii. s. To the same, for twenty-two ft>. of
varnish, xi. s. i. d." $ Elsewhere : "To Robert King,
for one cartload of charcoal for drying the painting in
the King's Chamber, iii. s. viii. d." §

The last entry appears to relate to the drying of
surfaces painted in oil, but the precaution may also
have been necessary before varnishing tempera. The
application of heat, even before painting in oil, ac-
cording to the directions of Eraclius, will here be re-
membered: "Ad solem vel ad ignem siccare permittes."
It can hardly escape observation, that the practice of
oil painting taught by Eraclius agrees in many details

* See Gage Rokewode's Account of the Painted Chamber, 1842, p. 15.

t "Reymundo pro xviii. li. albi plumbi ii. s. x. d. Eidem pro xvi.
gal. olei xvi. s. Eidem pro xxiiii. li. verniz xll. s. Hugoni le Ves-
punt pro xviii. gal. olei xxi. s."

t "Reymundo pro C. auri iii. s. Eidem pro xxii. li. verniz xi. s. i. d."

§ "Roberto King pro i. carecta carbonis ad picturam in Camera Regis
desiccandam iii. s. viii. d."

Permanent Painting

with that exemplified in the English records ; and the
circumstance may warrant a supposition that he com-
posed his treatise in this country. 1289 (i7th of Ed-
ward I). The following materials are enumerated in
an account relating to repairs in the Painted Cham-
ber: "white lead, varnish, green, oil, red lead, tin-foil,
size, gold leaf, silver leaf, red ochre, vermilion, indigo,
azure, earthen vessels, cloth, etc." *

In 1292, oil and varnish are twice mentioned in a
similar account, t In 1307, in consequence of a fire
(which occurred in 1298), repairs were again under-
taken, and similar materials were used.

The records of Ely are more conclusive as to the
mixture of oil with the colors; and, as the materials
are nearly the same as in the above extracts, it may
be inferred that oil painting of some kind was employed
at Westminster. Of this, indeed, there are other
proofs.

1325. Among the items of an account, three
flagons and a half of oil are mentioned "for painting

* "In albo plumbo, vernicio, viridi, oleo, plumbo rubeo, stangno
albo, cole (Fr. colle), auro, argento, sinople, vermilone, ynde, asura,
ollis, panno et allis minutis emptis ad viridandam novam Camereram
de petra et ad emendaciones picture mangne Camere Regis sicut patet
per particulas. Summa xii. li. vl. s. vi. d. ob. ' This extract is given in the
work last quoted, but with some inaccuracies ; for example, ranno
for panno, and in the heading, verniorum for verinorum. There is
no punctuation in the original account-rolls, but vernicio viridi should
not have been connected. It would be unjust to point out these
trifling oversights in an important and interesting work, without, at
the same time, paying a tribute of respect to the memory of one who
so often distinguished himself as an accurate and intelligent inves-
tigator.

t Item in iii. quarteronis olei empti. Summa ix. d. In 1. Ib. vernicio
(sic) empt. Summa iiii. d. In ocra, plastro, filo et pelli emptis," etc.

Permanent Painting

the figures upon the columns."* The term "ymagines,"
in these and other English records of the time, is used
indiscriminately for painted figures and for statues. In
the treatise of St. Audemar the latter are distinguished
as "ymagines rotunde." There can be little doubt that,
in the above passage, painted figures were meant;
and, in any case, oil colors were used.

In 1336, in a similar account, oil appears in abund-
ance, forty-eight flagons altogether; and this may ex-
plain its absence in other entries, where colors and
other materials are mentioned without oil. It should
also be observed that, if, in mutilated documents, "var-
nish" appears alone, it may always be inferred that
the oil (without which the vernix, or sandarac, was
of no use) was originally included in the list of ma-
terials. In the last mentioned account columns were
to be painted, t

In 1339 and 1341 oil again appears; in the account
of the former date "for tempering the colours." $

In 1351 oil is mentioned "for making the painting
in the chapel." § In all these documents, when varnish

* "In iii. lagenis et dimid. olei pro ymaginibus super columnas de-
pingend. iii. s. vi. d."

t "Item in vii. iv. albi plumbi emp. de eodem xii. s. prec. i. d. In
xiii. lagenis olei wmpt. de Thoma d'Elm x. s. iii. d. ob. prec. lagen.
x. d. ob'. In vi. lagenis olei empt. de Thoma de Chayk iv. s. xi. d. prec.
lagen. x. d. In xxviii. lagenis et dimid. olei empt. de Nich. de Wickam
xxvi. s. i. d. ob'. prec. lagen. xi. d. In dimid. lagen. olei empt. v/d. In
vas terren, pro oleo imponendo iv. d. quad. In i. longa corda empt.
pro le chapital deaurand. et column, depingend. viii. d., etc.

$ "In xxxi. lagenis et dimid. olei empt. de quodam nomine de Wick-
ham pro coloribus temperandis xxl. s. prec. lagen. viii. d.," etc.

§ "In oleo empt. pro pictura facienda in capella x. s.," etc. The
above extracts relating to Ely Cathedral will be found in the
Archaeologia, vol. ix.

Permanent Painting

is included in the items, the quantity, as usual, is noted
in weight.

The last accounts in the general list before given
(1352-1358) relate to St. Stephen's Chapel. They
are very numerous ; but, as already observed, they
afford no additional light respecting the particular ap-
plications of oil painting. In other respects they are
of great interest ; and, like those of the time of Edward
I, indicate a practice in art corresponding in almost
every particular with that described by Cennini.

The large supplies of oil which appear in the West-
minster and Ely records, indicate the coarseness of the
operations for which oil was required. The quantity
supplied to Giorgio d' Aquila, at Pinarolo, has ex-
cited the surprise of Italian antiquaries ; * but it now
appears that contemporary examples, quite as remark-
able, are to be found in English documents. Such no-
tices as the following (not the only entries of the
kind) at least remove all doubt as to the nature of
the oil sometimes used, and the general purposes for
which it was provided.

The extracts relate to St. Stephen's Chapel. Sept.
19, 1352, (25th of Edward III) : "For nineteen flagons
of painters' oil, bought for the painting of the chapel,
at 35. 4d. the flagon, 435. 4d." t March 19, 1353:

* See a letter from the Padre Guglielmo Delia Valle, in the Giprnale
di pisa, 1794. He endeavors to show, notwithstanding the plain ex-
pression, "non erat sufficiens in pingendo," that the oil may have
been used for lamps.

t "Die Lune xix. Septembris. In xix. lagenis olei pictorum emptis
pro pictura capelle precium lagene iii. s. iiii. d. xliii. s. iiii. d."

Permanent Painting

"To Thomas Drayton, for eight flagons of painters'
oil, bought for the painting of the chapel, at 2s. 6d.
the flagon, 2os." * May 13, in the same year: "To
John de Hennay, for seventy flagons and a half of
painters' oil, bought for the painting of the same
chapel, at 2od. the flagon, 1173. 6d." t Contracting
with this lavish use of oil, we find such entries as the
following: "To Gilbert Pokerig, for two flagons of
size, bought for the painting of the said chapel, 2d.
To the same, for two earthen vessels for heating the
size, three halfpence." $

Eggs, which afforded the vehicle for the finer work
in tempera, are not mentioned: this may, however,
be accounted for either by the incompleteness of the
records of this period, or by the nature of the work,
as the item occurs in earlier documents, hereafter to
be noticed, belonging to the reign of Edward I (1274).
It will be observed that the price of the oil used in
St. Stephen's Chapel varies, and that sometimes it
is more than three times the price of that employed
at Ely about the same time. The expression "painters
Oil," applied to the former, may explain this. It had
been probably purified and deprived of its mucilage
by exposure to the sun, in the mode then generally

* "Die Lune xix. die Marcii. Thome Drayton pro viii. lagenis olei
pictorum emptis pro pictura capelle precium lagene ii. s. vi. d. xx. s."

t "Die Lune xiii. die Maii. Johanni de Hennaij pro ixx. lagenis
et di. olei pictorum emptis pro pictura ejusdem capelle precium lagene
xx. d. cxvii. s. vi. d."

"Die Lune xix. die Marcii (1353). Gilberto Pokerig pro ii. lagenis

cole em " ~ * * "' '

emptis pro

•f. .L*riv, J~«U11*~ JV1JV. V11W MBOMVU V. A ** */ U / . VJ11-U _ _

de cole emptis pro pictura dicte capelle ii. d. Eidem pro ii. ollis terreis
emptis pro cole calefaciendo i. d. ob."

Permanent Painting

practiced for the preparation of linseed oil which
was to serve for better kinds of painting (on surfaces
where it was desirable to produce a gloss), and for
the composition of varnishes. This appears the more
likely, as the oil was sometimes purchased of the
(then) principal painter, Hugh of St. Albans. *

Cennino Cennini gives the most exact formulas for
the preparation of drying oil and varnishes, including
prescribed methods for the grinding of colors in oil
for painting in oil on iron and on stone, and one of the
most noteworthy facts that we have in conjunction
with this remarkable Italian investigator is, the fact,
that the description of the varnish kettles for the melt-
ing of the gum, and the implements used for stirring
are almost identical in shape with those that are used
in the present day, and in his description of the prepa-
ration of drying oil which we now popularly term "gold
size," is a slow-drying linseed oil that remains "tacky"
for several days, and dries without shrivelling. It is
also noteworthy of mention that our methods for
making an oil size do not differ to-day from the for-
mulas prescribed by Cennini.

The early Italians were better book-binders than
they were painters, and as nearly all of their subjects
were of a religious nature, the madonnas with the gold-

* "Die Lune xxv. die Julii (1352) Eidem (Magistro Hugoni de
Sancto Albano) pro xiii. lagenis olei pictorum emptis pro pictura diste
capelle precium lagene iii. s. iiii. d. xliii. s. iiii. d." The same quantity,
at the same comparatively high price, is entered on the 19th of Septem-
ber following. This extract has been already given.

Permanent Painting

en background, the saints with the golden halos, were
all so wonderfully prepared, that to this day we have
excellent examples of this art, which is really a mix-
ture of book-binding and painting.

About the year 1400, the practice of oil painting
had become thoroughly established, due undoubtedly,
to the research and investigation of the Van Eycks.
The examples of their oil painting which are in ex-
istence to this day are in a condition that is absolutely
remarkable. Even a superficial examination of one
of the paintings of Hubert Van Eyck in the National
Art Gallery in London, shows a brilliancy and fresh-
ness that pays an inexpressible tribute to the wonderful
care exercised by this master and his brother.

Permanent Painting

CHAPTER II
THE PIGMENTS USED BY THE ANCIENTS

THE permanence of the old paintings is entirely
due to the fact that the painters had very few
pigments to work with, and practically all of
them were native earths which were in many instances
exceedingly brilliant. The lapis lazuli which is the
same thing as our ultramarine blue of to-day occurs
in nature, and varies in shade from a greenish sky
blue to a dark ultramarine. The selection of various
shades of this most permanent pigment gave to all
the painters who used it a blue which has not been
surpassed.

For the yellow pigments there were ample yellow
earths in the form of ochre and sienna, which while
not very brilliant were sufficiently bright for all pur-
poses.

The white effect about the gesso paintings was pro-
duced by whiting and gypsum, and as white lead was
known 400 B. C., either as an artificial product or as
a mineral known as cerusite which is a native car-
bonate of lead, the use of this pigment was well known
and largely practiced, although its defects were noted
by nearly every one of the early writers.

Permanent Painting

As far as green is concerned, there were several
varieties of minerals that furnished green, principally
malachite, which is a form of carbonate of copper,
and no doubt when properly glazed was found to be
amply permanent, although sulphur gases affected it.

In addition to these pigments they had Grecian
green or Graecum which the French later on called
verte de grece, from which the term verdigris is de-
rived. Whether this was metallic copper subjected to
vinegar as we now know it, or whether it was the
turquoise mineral or clayey earth stained with phos-
phate of copper, as may have been the case, it is diffi-
cult to say, for the verdigris that we know in modern
art is transparent, and has the qualities of a lake or
stain, and not the qualities of a paint.

Concerning the reds which the ancients used, we
know that they were familiar with all the red oxides
of iron, and the Italians used not only calcined sienna
which is a brownish red and now recognized as burnt
sienna, but they also calcined ochre, which made a
yellower red. The bright red or vermilion used from
the thirteenth century on under the name of sinopia,
deserves a chapter for itself, and will be described
later on.

As regards the blue colors, indigo was used by the
Phoenicians. This is an organic compound which at
that time, according to the latest researches on the
subject, was obtained from the extract of a certain
fish. We now recognize this substance as Indican,

Permanent Painting

which is chemically analogous to indigo, and is found
as a product of decomposition, even in the human be-
ing. The dark blue dye that was used in Egypt, and
is still preserved in some of the mummy cases is
recognized as this particular indigo, and as the color
is mentioned by Cennini, there is ample evidence of
its use. It never was permanent, however, and all
our philosophies on the colors of the ancients can only
refer to those which have stood the test of time.

Concerning the blacks, we have evidence that russ
which is equivalent to our lampblack was manufac-
tured as far back as 1352, and that in the fourteenth
century the calcining of paints even to the ancients
was a familiar operation. *

There are about 215 tube colors for sale to-day for
the use of painters, and out of this entire amount there
are not over twelve that may have any possible use,
and ninety-nine painters out of a hundred could get
along almost perfectly with seven or eight pigments.
The remainder of this vast number of pigments in
existence are not only useless, but are a positive detri-
ment, because every one of them has some inherent
defect which makes it a menace to the permanence
of paintings. Inasmuch as we are concerned with
painting only as it has been tried since the time of
Van Eyck, and as a large number of the paintings
are still extant in a perfect state of preservation which

* See Eastlake, o. 133. Notes from a German manuscript in the
Public Library in Strassburg.

Permanent Painting

have been made since those days, it behooves us to
look into the materials and pigments that were used,
and as there is no need for any improvement in the
matter of pigments, it would be very well to stick to
the old ones.

If we go back 2000 to 3000 years we find that the
pigments used by the Egyptians, Phoenicians and those
described by Pliny were practically the same as those
that were used by the painters of the fourteenth, fif-
teenth and sixteenth centuries. In every case native
earths were used, although it is likely that zinc oxide
was a manufactured pigment in the time of Pliny, it
having been collected in the furnaces where zinc was
melted. But the media used before the discovery that
oil could be used in painting, had much to do with the
permanence and brilliancy of the colors, for assuming
that the principal media in those days was always
water with a glutinant such as the white of egg, glue
obtained by boiling parchment in water, or some simi-
lar adhesive material, there was no re-action between
the colors when they were dry, so that we have many
examples of brilliant tempera paintings that are 600
and 700 years old. The Flemish painters as well as
the Italians confined themselves to very few colors,
and all the colors used by the painters prior to the time
of artificial chemical colors are included in the fol-
lowing list:

Red: Sinopia, or cinnibar, which is the same as
our vermilion, but inasmuch as the native sinopia was

Permanent Painting

used, a variety of shades were obtained by selecting
ores ranging from orange to a very deep red.

Red oxides of iron, which were native, and burnt
ochres and burnt siennas. The burnt ochres and burnt
siennas are all equivalent to the Mars colors of to-day.

Yellow: native ochre, native sienna.

Green: pow.dered malachite, terre verte or green
earth.

Brown: native umber and bituminous earth similar
to cassel brown, vandyke brown, etc.

Black: burnt ivory, charred bones and condensed
soot (lampblack).

White: plaster of Paris (gypsum), whiting (cal-
cium carbonate). These two were used for gesso
painting and later for oil painting. White lead (ceru-
site), zinc oxide moderately, and tin oxide, but from
the evidence at hand white lead was used more than
any other white pigment.

Blue: the principal blue used was lapis lazuli,
which is identical with the ultramarine blue of to-day.
This ranges in color from a sky blue to a deep ultra-
marine, and was selected according to shade.

It must not be inferred that all the pigments used by
the painters of ancient times were absolutely perma-
nent, for only those that have survived have been per-
manent pigments, orpiment, for instance, which is the
tri-sulphide of arsenic, is a color which interacted with
other pigments.

Permanent Painting

A number of lakes were used which are the ex-
tracts of woods, as well as of plants, such as the beet
and cactus and red berries, but none of these red
lakes were permanent.

Permanent Painting

CHAPTER III

SINOPIA
THE SEARCH FOR THE MASTERS' SECRET

MUCH time and thought has been expended
upon the so-called search for the secret of
the old masters. This search was probably
started by Sir Joshua Reynolds, who had the idea
that the permanence of the pictures of the old mas-
ters was largely due to some secret knowledge which
they possessed of certain colors, and that the so-
called sinopia of the old masters was a red which
disappeared and had been duplicated after the six-
teenth century. On the contrary it is quite certain
that the early Italian and Flemish painters had no
secrets. Their painting was conducted upon lines
of common sense and intellectual investigation.
Rubens, Rembrandt, Franz Hals and their contem-
poraries did not use over five or possibly seven colors,
and the sinopia which they used was all of one origin.
Sinopia is evidently derived from the word sinopis,*
and means a red earth from which the name cinnibar
has been derived. We have therefore the cinnibar
or red earth which was well known as far back as the
twelfth century, and was found in an Austrian locality

* Die Malerei der Alten, Johns.

Permanent Painting

now known as Idria, which at that time was a province
of Venetia. In Spain * this pigment has likewise
long been known and is still found there to-day. It
occurs as a bright red earth varying in color from
scarlet to deep red, which is nothing more nor less than
quick silver vermilion in its native form, together
with oxide of iron.

From analyses made by the author of fragments of
paintings of the fourteenth century, bright reds are
conclusively proven to be sulphide of mercury or ver-
milion. It is also well known that for thousands of
years the Chinese either made vermilion artificially,
or carefully selected the bright particles from their
native ores, and that the Chinese vermilion was in-
troduced into Venetia during the thirteenth century
by Marco Polo. This celebrated explorer traveled
eastward, and found the first passage to the Orient.
However, as the first authentic biography of Marco
Polo was written by John Baptist Remusio 200 years
after Marco Polo's death, there is some doubt as to
some of the details of his trip. So we have, not only
the introduction of the artificial and natural Chinese
vermilion into Italy during the thirteenth century, but
we have the Spanish ores of Almaden, and ores from
the mines of Idria, from which all shades of bright
red were selected for the production of this so-called
sinopia, which was supposed to have been the brilliant
and permanent red which was one of the causes of

* The Almaden Mines.

Permanent Painting

the superiority of the lost art, and one of the alleged
great secrets of the old masters.

In examining a piece of ore from the Idria section,
it is noted that many bright shades of red may be ex-
tracted and as sulphide of mercury when properly
varnished and not exposed to brilliant sunshine does
not change, we have a satisfactory explanation of the
celebrated permanent red.

There is no doubt that in addition to using this
red as a body color, hundreds of artists glazed this
natural or artificial red with madder lake, and the
condition of paintings of Franz Hals and his con-
temporary school is evidence of that fact.

Some statements have been made that sinopia is a
color redder than vermilion, and was made from mad-
der, but as vermilion or cinnibar is composed of all
the shades of red from minium to deep scarlet, and
as madder was known during that time, it is more than
likely that the madder was used either as a glaze or
mixed with vermilion, and in either case it was per-
manent, because all of the painters of that time var-
nished their pictures.

Some statements have been made referring to mad-
der as a Brazil wood lake, and Eastlake makes the
statement "Lignum brasilium nascitur in partibus
Alexandriae et est rubei coloris." Brazil wood has
its origin in a part of Alexandria, and is of red color,
but inasmuch as Brazil was neither discovered nor
exploited for several centuries afterwards, this state-

Permanent Painting

ment must be taken to refer to some particular wood
which was called Brazil 'wood, and which was indi-
genous to the country around Alexandria, and cannot
be confounded with the Brazil wood we know, which
produces a maroon dye that is exceedingly fugitive.

As far as the secret of the old masters is concerned,
it would be very wise for modern painters not to waste
their time in a search of this kind for these old masters
whose pictures have lived to this day, were possessed
of only one secret, which was common sense.

Permanent Painting

CHAPTER IV

PHOTO-CHEMICAL DETERIORATION
OF OIL PAINTINGS*

ALL oil paintings show unmistakable signs of
age. Students who visit the various art galleries
and copy old oil paintings invariably glaze them
with a lake color or asphaltum, so that the lighter
colors are toned down and show a yellowish brown
tinge, which to all of us is an unmistakable sign of
age. The cause of this deterioration is nowhere in
the entire literature of oil paintings, as far as the
writer could learn. A number of writers have all
suggested a remedy, which suggests the causes, the
remedy given being the exposure of a painting to
bright sunlight. The change in color is always more
apparent in the high lights, and where light tints have
been used, and inasmuch as water colors, pastels,
and tempera painting do not show this particular
deterioration, it is quite evident that the cause does
not lie in the pigment itself, nor in the sub-stratum
upon which is painted, but in the medium which is
used to bind the pigment to its foundation. In search-

* Read before the 7th International Congress of Applied Chemistry,
London, May 28, 1909.

Permanent Painting

ing for the cause, an analogous condition exists on
walls of buildings which are painted in oil paint,
for it is always apparent that where the sun shines on
a wall it either retains its pristine color or becomes
more brilliant. Similarly, back of the picture there is
a distinct yellowing or browning of the pigment which
gives a clear line of demarkation where the picture
hung. Another piece of evidence is the fact that no
such yellowing occurs where walls are painted with
distemper or water colors, but this particular reaction
is apparent in every instance where oil pigments are
used. After finding the cause the task of finding a
remedy was more simple. A series of experiments
were tried by the author in the following sequence,
and with the following results :

That the cause is what may be termed the effect of
light on a mixture of 'white lead, zinc oxide and lin-
seed oil, or a linseed oil varnish is evident because
paint chemists have long known that white lead in
any form, whether it be called flake white, kremitz
white, silver white or white lead, has a reducing ac-
tion on the pigment present in linseed oil, or linseed
oil varnish, and that this reducing action changes this
pigment into another pigment which is yellow. It
may fairly be asked whether such a reaction can take
place if the linseed oil is bleached. To this question
the reply must be given that the bleaching of linseed
oil does not destroy the color which is present, but
simply changes it from an olive yellow to an exceed-

Permanent Painting

ingly pale yellow, which can hardly be seen, so if we
take refined or bleached linseed oil and mix it with
white lead or a pigment containing white lead or zinc
oxide, we have a very brilliant white which remains
white as long as it is exposed to bright light. If
we take this mixture and place it for six weeks in
an absolutely dark place, the white paint changes into
the well known yellow tint and it is this particular
change which produces in all paintings the distinct
yellowness of age. Flaxseed, from which linseed oil
is made, contains a coloring matter which is known
as chlorophyll. This is the same coloring matter which
is found in all plants, in many of the woods and in
a large number of gums and resins, particularly in the
fossil resins.

Vibert, the well known French painter, knew this
fact without having been able to trace it to its chemical
cause, and this led him to abandon entirely linseed
oil as a binding medium and to substitute petroleum
and colophony compounds with which he painted most
of his pictures. Nearly all of his subjects contain
little or no light colors, such as whites or straw colors,
but as his particular forte lay in painting pictures
of cardinals, the original brilliancy of his paintings
still remains, and there is no reason why his pictures
should not endure for centuries, if they are properly
protected from any influence of the elements and ob-
noxious gases of modern civilization.

A long series of experiments were, therefore, made

Permanent Painting

and commercial chlorophyll, which is the coloring
matter of flaxseed, grass, and the fossil resins, was
taken and mixed with white lead and zinc oxide (zinc
white), exposed to the sunlight for a short time and
then placed in a dark closet for varying periods from
six weeks to three months. In every instance the
white turned yellow; sometimes a bright canary yel-
low, sometimes a dirty yellowish brown, but the yel-
low effect was always obtained. A similar line of
experiments was made in which gum damar was
dissolved in turpentine, naphtha and benzol, and
the results carefully noted. Gum damar and turpen-
tine showed only an exceedingly slight decomposition,
and gum damar containing a small percentage of
benzol and a large percentage of naphtha showed no
decomposition. The human eye is not very sensitive
to these shades, but fortunately we have the pho-
tographic plate. Photographs taken of these various
mixtures on plates which are not over sensitive to
yellow show up these results with better effect than
the human eye can discern them in the original
chlorophyll experiment.

Another line of experiments was carried out, in
which bleached linseed oil was used. This turned
exceedingly yellow in three months, but when ex-
posed for .three months to the bright sunlight it be-
came brilliant white again, and upon being placed in
a dark closet for another three months no change took
place. Those parts of the painted experiment which

Permanent Painting

had been bleached by the sunlight remained white
in the dark closet at the end of the experiment. This
would, therefore, prove that when a picture has turned
yellow it can safely be exposed to the sunlight in
order to bring it back to its natural brilliancy, pro-
vided, of course, that no part of it has been painted
with asphaltum or bitumen, for the asphaltum and
bitumen instead of bleaching in the light become
black. To those who are interested in this photo-chem-
ical experiment, the author refers to his paper on "The
Influence of Sunlight on Paints and Varnishes," Jour-
nal Society of Chemical Industry, April 15, 1908, No.
7, Vol. XXVII.

Nearly all of the varnishes, with few exceptions,
contribute largely to this deterioration of oil paint-
ings, because the coloring matter in a dark place or
away from the brilliant light changes from a neutral
or invisible to a yellowish tint, which is due to a direct
decomposition of chlorophyll into one of its lower
bodies. A similar line of experiments were conducted
with such resins as Manila copal, West Coast copal,
and Zanzibar copal, all of which turned yellow even
though no linseed oil was present. It is, therefore,
easy to conclude that these and all fossil resins con-
tain coloring matters similar to those present in grass,
flaxseed, and in some instances, turpentine.

Furthermore, all of these fossil resins when used
for making varnish are reduced or fluxed in a solution
of linseed oil. The varnishes which, however, do not

Permanent Painting

show this same effect are the alcohol varnishes com-
posed of solutions of bleached shellac, sandarac, and
mastic, although these show also some slight tendency
toward turning yellow. The one resin which, however,
resisted the action of darkening when mixed with
white lead was gum damar. As there are three well
known varieties of this gum used in the arts, the au-
thor has found that Batavia, Singapore and Pedang,
when selected for brilliancy of color in their original
state, are the safest to use, but there are varieties of
these three gums which are originally yellow and
should be avoided either as a varnish or as a medium
for oil painting. The objection may be urged that
the solution of gum damar is not sufficiently binding
as compared with linseed oil, but to this the answer
must be made that an oil painting is never exposed
to the elements and is certainly more tenacious and
less liable to decomposition than the media used by
the ancients such as white of egg, mucilaginous mat-
ter, etc. We have authentic records where paintings
executed by the Romans with poor and weak media
have lasted for upwards of twenty centuries.

Of the solid white pigments, which induce the
decomposition of oil and varnishes, white lead is the
strongest in its action and zinc sulphide, or lithopone,
is the weakest. It has been urged that lithopone, which
is a mixture of zinc sulphide and barium sulphate —
barium sulphate being the old permanent white or
blanc fixe — should be substituted for all white pig-

Permanent Painting

ments in oil painting, but this cannot be urged at pres-
ent for the reason that the majority of the lithopories
are acted upon by light and turn gray, although there
are a variety of patents for the manufacture of lith-
opone which are alleged to be permanent. On exam-
ining these we find that their brilliancy is superin-
duced by the addition of a soluble salt such as nitrate
of soda, and when lithopone, either according to the
special American patents or the German patents, is
mixed with gum damar solution no change takes
place, but when mixed with linseed oil, either bleached
or unbleached, the soluble salt produces the same
effect as white lead in so far that it reduces the color-
ing matter from a neutral and invisible tint to a yellow
or yellowish pigment, and, therefore, no advantage is
gained at present by the use of this so-called perma-
nent lithopone. Zinc oxide, or zinc white, is therefore,
as yet, the most permanent pigment, although perma-
nent white or blanc fixe is absolutely inert but it has
the inherent weakness that it has no hiding power and
is really more of a glaze than an opaque pigment.

However, if linseed oil is insisted upon by the paint-
er the raw, unbleached, unrefined product should be
used for it is reasonable to assume that it cannot
grow any darker as long as the coloring matter is not
visibly hidden, but may improve, for upon exposure
the coloring matter will surely bleach, and upon re-
placing the painting in a poorly lighted room it will
not grow any darker than it originally was when the

Permanent Painting

painter used it. Some painters use poppy oil, which is
almost colorless ; other painters use walnut oil, but the
author finds that while poppy oil and walnut oil are
not so prone to become yellow with age, they never-
theless do become yellow and have in addition the
fault of drying exceedingly slowly, which interferes
largely with the progress of the painting. The driers'
that painters use are also to be avoided. The one
color, megilp, which contains both lead and manganese,
frequently exhibits a dirty pink, and the sugar of lead
drier turns the oil yellow even quicker than white
lead does.

Summing up the facts before us, it is reasonable to
conclude that in order to make a painting permanent
a medium like damar or mastic varnish, which has
back of it a long history and is not experimental, may
be advocated for general use as a varnish with which
to glaze a painting and preserve its permanency. It
has very few defects and much in its favor. In looking
over the works of the Flemish artists, particularly
those by the Van Eycks, which may be seen in the
London galleries, it is quite evident that all these
painters used a medium other than tempera. It is
exceedingly likely that the medium contained little
linseed oil, and possibly a varnish composed of an
easily soluble gum, either like damar or mastic.

Permanent Painting

CHAPTER V

THE CAUSE OF THE CRACKING OF
PAINTINGS AND THE REMEDIES

IT is very interesting to note that the little which
is written on this subject varies with the actual
facts presented in the case, and in addition is
relatively incomplete. Nearly all writers give, as the
cause of the cracking of paintings, two or three or-
dinary phenomena, when, as a matter of fact, the
cause of the cracking of paintings may be due to a
large variety of causes. The following are the prin-
cipal causes for the cracking of paintings :

1. The application of such pigments as, for in-
stance, umber or zinc white over lampblack, graphite,
black lead, asphaltum or lake.

2. The application to a picture of a varnish over
a surface that has not been thoroughly dried.

3. The effect of dry atmosphere on a painting,
which contracts the canvas and leaves the paint film
in its original size.

4. The unequal tension or compression of a can-
vas due to moisture.

5. The application of a flat drying paint over a
glossy paint.

Photo-micrograph of a section of an oil painting shoeing
cracks. A. A. is a photograph of the warp of the can-
vas. The oblong white surfaces are thin films of paint
which are cracked through tension and drying.

Permanent Painting

I

or-
ier of fact, the

The fo!

:e cracking of PC
•ation of such r
r or zinc white over Ian-
ohaltum or lake,
plication to a pictu
t has no

dry atr
the canvas and

•M

;o rtqut^o1oH<4

Permanent Painting

6. The application of megilp over a soft ground.

7. The use of bitumen as a glaze.

I. We learn from practical painters who apply
colors and varnishes to the surfaces of carriages, au-
tomobiles and railway cars, that a proper ground must
be prepared so that each coat will be dependent upon
the other, and that the priming coat shall be harder
than the layer above it. Practical painters, however,
never have surfaces like canvas to paint, excepting
when these surfaces are directly applied by means
of a glutinant to a wall or similar foundation. We
notice, even in the climate of North America, where
the temperature variation is about 130° R, that the
paint film on nearly all vehicles is permanent without
cracking or peeling for several years. The principal
cause is that a priming coat is applied of a hard drying
paint which is rubbed down so as to present a smooth
and uniform layer, and that a gloss coat is never placed
over a gloss coat, but a gloss coat is always applied
over a flat coat, in which case we have what is known
as a "mechanical bond."

Canvas made of linen is exceedingly susceptible to
the influence of moisture, and prepared canvas is
generally sold with a coating that is sufficiently flat
and has a better grain so that the first layer at least
takes good hold. In order, therefore, to prevent crack-
ing and to remedy it when it has taken place, it is
essential to apply a good coat of paint on the back of

Permanent Painting

the canvas, or to mount the finished picture upon
another sheet of canvas which has been previously
painted. The paint which has been found most suit-
able for the prevention of the absorption of moisture
by a finished picture, and which in many instances will
close up minute hairline cracks that have already
started, is a mixture composed of one pound of red
lead, dry, one pound white zinc, ground in oil, thinned
with sufficient raw oil and turpentine to make a ready
for use paint, having the consistency of cream. This
mixture cannot be kept ready for use, because the red
lead will combine with the oil and form a species of ce-
ment which dries very hard, and yet has some flex-
ibility. The application of such a mixture to the back
of a canvas makes it impervious to moisture and at-
mospheric influences, and preserves an otherwise weak
painting.

When the cracking occurs through the influence
exerted on the back of the canvas, it is due absolutely
to an engineering condition which is known as "com-
pression and tension." The accompanying diagram
illustrates this fact, so that we may have cracking
which is entirely due to a curvature of the painted
surface which is known as tension, or a compression
of the canvas side, which is known as compression.

The artistic painter can demonstrate this for him-
self, if he will take an ordinary kodak film, which is
perfectly flat, and paint one side of it with a mixture
of, say, zinc white or reduced with turpentine only,

A

N EUTR AL

AXIS
^-CANVAS

The Engineering features of a painting at rest in which the centre
line is the neutral axis.

B

CRACK5
PRODUCED
THROUGH TENSION

NEUTRAL
AXIS

The canvas in compression and the paint in tension, the tension
producing cracks owing to the expansion of the paint films.

WRINKLES

NEUTRAL
AXIS

The paint in compression and the canvas in tension, which is the
cause of paint films being forced from the canvas as indicated by
the arrow.

Permanent Painting

fasten it to a board so that it will not curl, and
when it is dry, bend the surface which has been
painted in an outward direction, whereupon he will
find that the painted surface will show minute delicate
cracks, which explains the theory of tension, and the
theory of compression. The side in tension which is
the painted side, invariably cracks. This then goes
far toward explaining why pictures painted on metal
or on wood have stood for centuries and have not
cracked, and why unprotected pictures painted on can-
vas have cracked. Even wood panels are better pro-
tected when they are varnished on the reverse side
than when they are permitted to warp.

The author cites as an illustration a painting by
Michau on an oak panel which had for two centuries
remained evidently in a perfectly flat condition in Bel-
gium, but became badly warped when brought over
to America, and only the application on the edges and
the reverse side of two coats of the red lead and zinc
paint, prevented what might have been a bad crack-
ing of the panel itself. The climate in the winter in
the United States shows an abnormally dry condition,
and in the summer an abnormally moist condition,
so that a painting which will curve outwardly in the
winter through the contraction of the underside, will
curve inwardly in the summer time, and this alter-
nate bending inwardly and outwardly would eventually
show some cracks.

2. One of the most fruitful surfaces for the crack-'

Permanent Painting

ing of pictures is the varnishing of a picture before it
is dry, and complaints are frequently heard that some
varnishes are less liable to crack than others. This
is largely the case with the alcohol varnishes which
show a tendency to crack, and owing to their brittle-
ness they should only be used under certain conditions.
As the alcohol varnishes dry by evaporation they dry
very rapidly. Many of the paints expand in the drying
and some few of them ultimately contract, so that
in either case varnishing even after apparent dryness
with an alcohol varnish will produce very bad cracks.
It has been generally stated, as an axiom, that a pic-
ture should be six months old before it be varnished.
This is merely an arbitrary figure, and in every instance
it is far better to wait a year if it can be conveniently
done, than to varnish a picture in six months. Where,
for instance, a very slow drying pigment like any one
of the lakes, lampblack, black lead, etc., are used,
and the picture is varnished before these pigments are
thoroughly dry, cracking is bound to ensue. We there-
fore have the familiar phenomenon of a varnished
picture which cracks in some places and is perfectly
intact in others. This is due entirely to the so-called
selective drying of the pigment itself. It is therefore
wise under any circumstance to expose a picture to a
current of air and to the bright light before varnishing.
3. This can always be obviated by properly paint-
ing the underside of the canvas. Where a painting of
the underside is not desirable, the picture can be

Permanent Painting

mounted either upon metal or stretch

of canvas by means of a mixture of white lead and
Venice turpentine.

4, The climatic influence which has be'
described, and which will cause crack;
on canvas, is more noticeable in climates like
the eastern part of the United States than
Germany or England where the atmosphere
tively moist the year round. Paintings cat-
preserved in any climate when they are prop
tected against dampness or dry air. If the
is applied had the sam
which is technically ca*

efficient of expansion," as the pigments the
there would be no trouble from this source.
paint film of an oil painting is exceedingly
absorb moisture, and when the air is dry it
the moisture just as slowly, whereas ca
very readily and dries out very readily.
ticularly dry wood, absorbs moisture readily
slowly than canvas. There are a large n >
paintings on copper which have been ter
served for many centuries, so that where a
can use either well seasoned wood or c -•; ;•
advisableTo do so.

5. -iff

n>qo 9-t) $}im ^jrt. .rtfeui i»iib

tive drying qualities of paints an

for the painter to follow the
The tollowing experiment v ~"f""

Phofo-micro<§raph of cracks in a painting, and dirt or
dust encysted in the varnish. These cracks are open
fissures.

Permanent Painting

mounted either upon metal or upon another stretch
of canvas by means of a mixture of white lead and
Venice turpentine.

4. The climatic influence which has been previously
described, and which will cause cracks particularly
on canvas, is more noticeable in climates like those in
the eastern part of the United States than it is in
Germany or England where the atmosphere is rela-
tively moist the year round. Paintings can be best
preserved in any climate when they are properly pro-
tected against dampness or dry air. If the material
upon which the paint is applied had the same expan-
sion and contraction which is technically called "co-
efficient of expansion," as the pigments themselves,
there would be no trouble from this source, but the
paint film of an oil painting is exceedingly slow to
absorb moisture, and when the air is dry it gives up
the moisture just as slowly, whereas canvas absorbs
very readily and dries out very readily. Wood, par-
ticularly dry wood, absorbs moisture readily but more
slowly than canvas. There are a large number of old
paintings on copper which have been technically pre-
served for many centuries, so that where a painter
can use either well seasoned wood or copper, it is
advisable to do so.

5. In the proper chapter (see page 187), the rela-
tive drying qualities of paints are given, and it is wise
for the painter to follow the rules laid down.

The following experiment will illustrate a fruitful

Permanent Painting

source of cracks in painting and many other pigments
will act in a similar manner to a greater or lesser de-
gree. Materials like minium, which is red lead, or
burnt umber, dry with great rapidity, particularly
when turpentine is added. Apply either one of these
pigments over a ground work of pigments composed
of lampblack or a lake, and it will be readily noted
that within two weeks the top coat will contract and
the bottom coat will expand, so that, because these two
pigments do not dry co-ordinately, cracks will develop
and the surface will resemble alligator hide, sometimes
minutely, and sometimes with scales almost as large
as those of the alligator hide itself.

6. The use of megilp.

This refers to the previous paragraph, and comes
under the same heading, for megilp is a powerful
oxidizing agent, and will produce a cracking when
mixed with any pigment if placed over a soft drying
ground. The same phenomenon results if megilp is
used excessively with even a slow drying color such
as madder lake or lampblack. Megilp, irrespective
of this fact, is a material which should not be used
by any painter, for in addition to its rapid drying
qualities, it has a destructive influence on many of
the finer colors.

7. Bitumen as a glaze has been productive of more
damage than painters are aware of. It will produce
cracks over almost any pigment to which it be ap-
plied, for it dries principally by evaporation, whereas

Permanent Painting

the ground upon which it is placed dries by oxidation.
Its photo-chemical defects have been described under
the heading of asphaltum, page 89, and need not be re-
peated here, but its physical defects are so patent, and
it has been productive of so much disaster in the pro-
duction of cracks, owing to unequal tension which
it produces, that it should never be used.

Permanent Painting

CHAPTER VI

CANVAS, WOOD AND METAL
AS FOUNDATIONS

IT is obvious that the best foundation for any pic-
ture is a sheet of metal. The next choice is a
panel of oak or mahogany thoroughly seasoned,
and last and least, a stretch of canvas. Copper has
been used for centuries as a foundation for pictures,
and as such cannot be improved upon, particularly if
the copper be rolled out sufficiently thin and fastened
to a well seasoned piece of wood. Next in choice and
perhaps just as good, is zinc, but as both copper and
zinc are exceedingly smooth, it is always advisable
to roughen the surface by means of sand or emery
powder, which gives it the appearance of ground
glass, after which it takes the first coat of paint with
perfect ease.

If artistic painters would only follow the precept and
.experience of coach painters, who, from time imme-
morial have followed the same rule, pictures would
be much more permanent and less liable to crack.
The coach painter, and in this category must be in-
cluded the railway car painter and the automobile

Painting on mahogany panel showing serious cracks
produced by varnishing the picture before the underlying
coat was sufficiently dry.

(Painting in the possession of the author.)

Permanent Painting

JDATIC

I obvious that the best f<
ture is a sheet of n

oak or mahogany the

and least, a stretch Copper has

r centuries as a -res,

cannot be i
:opper be rolled out

to a well seasoned piece < and

and
Iways advisable

the ap: and

vith

ick.

The in~

clud

Permanent Painting

painter, prepare the metal or wooden surface by first
rubbing with sandpaper, emery cloth or pumice stone.
Any imperfections in the surface are generally re-
moved by the application of a first coating of what
is known as "rough stuff." Rough stuff may be a
finely powdered mineral such as slate or silicious
clay, to which a little lampblack and white lead is
added. The medium is not oil but Japan varnish,
which is composed of a hard, quick-drying varnish
containing very little oil. After two or three days,
or sooner, this coating is sufficiently dry to be rubbed
again, and a coat of white lead and lampblack is then
applied, or pure white lead mixed with the same Japan
varnish which is known as "Gold Size Japan," or
"Coach Makers Japan." After this second coat is
rubbed it presents a good surface for subsequent paint-
ing, which is exceedingly hard, but yet not brittle.
This description refers, of course, to painting on a
solid foundation like wood or metal, for on canvas
such a treatment is ill advised owing to the unequal
expansion and contraction between the canvas and the
hard coating of such a priming paint.

From experiments which the author has made, it
would appear that a sheet of aluminum -j^ of an inch
thick rubbed with either linseed oil and finely pow-
dered emery, or with pumice stone and water, pre-
sents a surface upon which a mixture of zinc white and
white lead may be applied, forming a surface most de-
sirable for subsequent painting, and giving a film which

Permanent Painting

should be permanent for all time. Under no circum-
stances should the priming coat of any picture dry
with a high gloss, otherwise no union takes place be-
tween the film of paint and the metal to which it be
applied. The unequal expansion between an elastic
coat and a rigid metal are very undesirable, but in
spite of any good advice that may be given on this
subject, painters will continue to paint on canvas,
and such being the case, the best advice to give is
to follow the precepts of the old Flemish painters, and
paste the canvas either on a wood or metal foundation
with white lead and Venice turpentine.

Where canvas is mounted on a wooden stretcher, and
is sufficiently dry, the best application for the back
is a hard drying semi-elastic paint, composed of red
lead, white lead and zinc oxide, raw oil and turpentine.
This should be applied until a thick glossy coating is
obtained. Such a coating prevents cracks, and in-
hibits any chemical action through the underside of
the canvas.

The purchase of ready made canvas is not always
to be recommended. This statement refers to the
canvas ready for immediate painting. Where a paintj
er has the time a canvas may be purchased mounted
upon a proper stretcher and treated in the following
manner: A first coat of white lead is applied to the
front and back of the canvas, and then a second coat
of zinc oxide on the front of the canvas is properly
rubbed down and smoothed. This makes an admirable

Permanent Painting

surface which has sufficient tooth to take subsequent
coats.

It has often been advised to prime canvas with a
glue size, but the glue is continually subject to the
influence of moisture, which it will absorb on a damp
day and release again on a dry day, so that continual
contraction and expansion take place, which is one of
the causes of the cracking of paintings. A good hard
coat of paint composed of white lead, more zinc and
coach painter's japan properly applied to the surface of
canvas will, in a few days, lay the lint sufficiently hard
so that it can be sandpapered smooth. The next coat,
which should also be a coat that does not dry glossy
and that contains sufficient turpentine, will make a
perfectly smooth foundation, and a paint of this sort
is less subject to expansion and contraction than one
painted on a glue size. Any painter can prepare a
dozen canvases after this method, and if they are placed
in the sun and allowed to ripen with age, they even-
tually become hard without becoming brittle.

For a canvas which is to be rolled up, a totally
different method must be pursued. Such a canvas
must have a very flexible foundation, and this can best
be obtained by using raw linseed oil with a mixture
of white lead and lampblack as a first coat. This mix-
ture will take several days to dry. It should be very
thinly applied, each coat containing less lampblack
until a white surface is obtained. The rear side of
the canvas where it is to be rolled up, should be treated

Permanent Painting

solely with a coat of raw linseed oil and nothing else.
A canvas so treated will remain flexible for many
years.

Permanent Painting

CHAPTER VII

PREPARATION OF CANVAS IN
COMMERCIAL PRACTICE

CANVAS for oil painting is stretched upon large
frames, and receives a sizing coat of glue and
water. After this sizing coat is dry, three coats
of white lead in oil slightly tinted with black to
produce a gray color are applied. The first coat is
generally a very thick mixture of lead, oil, turpentine
and drier which is applied to the canvas by means
of a stick, and then scraped off with a curved steel
knife. This is done for the purpose of pressing the
material into the fibre of the canvas, and likewise
for the purpose of producing a perfectly smooth sur-
face. The two following coats are usually applied
by means of brushes, and the material is thinned down
with turpentine so that it will dry perfectly flat. The
canvas is then stripped from the frame and rolled up,
and after a few months becomes decidedly brittle.
Up to date there has been no improvement in the
preparation of canvas and it is difficult to believe that
in this age of progress the preparation of canvas is
still a hand-made procedure. Canvas ought really to

Permanent Painting

be coated on both sides, and the coatings should be
so very flexible that the question of cracking when
the canvas is rolled up should be entirely eliminated.

The use of wood panels is not to be recommended in
America, unless the wood is thoroughly seasoned.
After it has been seasoned and planed, it should be
allowed to soak for several weeks in a linseed oil
varnish in order that it may absorb sufficient material
to prevent future warping. The hygroscopic condi-
tions in America are totally different from those pre-
vailing in Europe. In Europe a painting on wood
will remain perfect for centuries, because the amount
of moisture in the air remains fairly uniform for a
given locality, but even on the sea coasts in the United
States the moisture conditions in the atmosphere vary
so remarkably that it is below normal in the winter
time, and above normal in the summer. Humidity in
the atmosphere is generally expressed by arbitrary
numbers, 100 representing a saturated condition of
the atmosphere during a rain storm. Fifty is exceed-
ingly dry, but in the winter on a clear day the humid-
ity in the atmosphere is expressed by the figure 30.
In such an atmosphere materials may be said to be
anhydrous.

An oil painting on wood, unless it be properly pro-
tected either by successive coats of paint on all sides,
or has been previously soaked in oil, varnish or shellac,
will warp in the winter time with a curvature on the
side of the painting, the reverse side being convex.

Permanent Painting

The result is that the obverse or painted side becomes
cracked.

It is therefore preferable to paint on metal or on
the composition known as academy board, which is a
wood pulp or paper surface formed by cementing to-
gether several thicknesses of pasteboard or card-
board, and applying a coat of oil paint on what ulti-
mately becomes the obverse side.

Permanent Painting

CHAPTER VIII

RENOVATION AND CLEANING
OF PICTURES

THERE is perhaps no subject on which so little
is definitely known as the renovation or cleaning
of oil paintings, for the reason that no set rules
can be given. It is essential that anyone who at-
tempts to clean a picture should have some knowledge
of the pigments, oils and varnishes that were used;
otherwise good results are not obtained, and in many
instances the painting is ruined. If we attempt to
clean a picture with soap and water, which is very
frequently done, and it happens to be an old painting
of the tempera type, soap and water would dissolve the
entire picture with ruinous results, but if the painting
is made on wood or metal such preliminary clean-
ing can be resorted to, but no strong friction or at-
trition should take place on account of the danger of
abrasion. If, on the other hand, we attempted to
clean a picture with wood alcohol and turpentine, and
it were painted with the same colors and media used
by Vibert, and recommended by him, the picture
would be almost instantly dissolved and effaced from

Permanent Painting

its canvas. It therefore becomes imperative to ex-
periment on the edge of a picture, preferably that
part which is usually protected by the frame, with
various solvents, in order to determine exactly what
will take place.

As far as the remedy for cracks is concerned, the
reader is referred to the chapter on "The Cause of
the Cracking of Pictures ; Its Prevention and Remedy."
Therefore, this chapter will only deal with renovation,
and it is assumed that the person who attempts to
clean a painting is familiar with the materials used,
and inasmuch as perhaps ninety-nine paintings out
of one hundred that look like oil paintings are oil
paintings, the remedies given by the author are for
this class of pictures entirely.

The first essential is to determine the mount, whether
it is wood, academy board or canvas. If it is can-
vas, two courses may be pursued ; first, paint the back
of the picture (see page 41), or second, mount the
canvas with a mixture of white lead and Venice tur-
pentine on another canvas. There are a large
number of chemical solvents which remove old
varnish, but these should only be used by a
skilled operator. The most important of these chem-
ical solvents are acetone, benzine, naphtha, benzol,
amyl acetate, amyl alcohol (fusel oil), ethyl
alcohol (grain alcohol), terpineol, methyl alcohol
(wood alcohol), and various mixtures of these sub-
stances. The least harmful and the weakest is or-

Permanent Painting

dinary benzine, such as is used for cleaning gloves and
garments, but it is not sufficiently strong to dissolve
old dried cracked varnish. At the same time, a solvent
which is strong enough to dissolve cracked varnish
may likewise be strong enough to destroy the painting
itself. Whether the picture is varnished or not, or-
dinary wood alcohol is taken either on a clean cot-
ton rag or a sponge, and lightly rubbed in one cor-
ner. If it be varnished, the wood alcohol wi1!
very likely dissolve the varnish without touching
the painting, but if there is any difficulty in dissolving
the varnish, a mechanical mixture of turpentine and
wood alcohol would have to be used, and as a general
rule this will take off all the varnish. Forcible abra-
sion must never be resorted to, for any wet rag will,
as a rule, take off some of the paint. The dried lin-
seed oil or other drying oil film is not soluble in tur-
pentine, but is attacked by wood alcohol after pro-
longed use. Therefore, if pure turpentine will cleanse
a picture, it is wise to let it go at that, and as a gen-
eral rule, assuming always that the picture is an oil
painting, a stiff brush will very frequently aid in
cleansing almost every part of a picture without the
addition of wood alcohol, so that we have here only
two re-agents which are necessary. It is necessary to
warn everyone not to try the so-called paint removers,
benzol or carbon tetrachloride mixtures which are
sold, because in many instances the use of these ma-
terials is very harmful because the solvent action is

Permanent Painting

entirely too great. Ordinary naphtha or gasoline, such
as is used for cleaning gloves, can be very safely recom-
mended, because its solvent action is not as great as
that of turpentine and wood alcohol, so that, with the
aid of these three materials, almost any varnish can be
removed, and any adherent foreign substance easily
washed off.

The use of soap and water is recommended by many,
but this is always more or less dangerous unless the
soap is absolutely neutral. It always finds its way into
cracks, is absorbed by the canvas and the under-
lying paint, so that in many instances a painting be-
comes so badly buckled that, even though it is cleaned,
the cracks and defects are magnified. (Great care
must be taken not to use a soap which is alkaline. The
soaps which are neutral are principally the shaving
soaps, Ivory Soap, and genuine castile soap). The
soap may be mixed with tepid water and applied with
a sponge to the surface of the painting, thereby re-
moving the thickened dust and dirt from its surface.
An application of this kind will seldom, if ever, do
any harm, except on a painting which is badly cracked,
and where water is liable to soak into the canvas and
swell it, or where the painting is based on an aqueous
mixture.

Colors which have become darkened with age or
affected by the sulphur fumes of the atmosphere, like
flake white, and English or chrome vermilion, can
only be properly renovated if the surface is abraded,

Permanent Painting

and this can be frequently accomplished by means
of a ball made of the inside of a fresh loaf of rye
bread. The ball is gently rubbed on the picture after
it has been cleaned with soap and water, and this is
to be done in a good light. The rubbing given by
means of the ball of bread will remove the outer layer
and bring the color up to its original brilliancy.

It is essential that experiments be tried on a very
small part, preferably in a corner or on an edge of the
picture with various solvents, in order to determine
whether any harm would be done or not. After wash-
ing a picture it may be rubbed with a clean woolen
rag which has been dipped in pure spirits of turpen-
tine, for spirits of turpentine will very often dissolve
a varnish like mastic or damar but will not attack the
dry linseed oil film of the painting beneath. The same
may be said of benzine. A mixture of benzine and
turpentine will frequently do no harm, but its appli-
cation must always be followed by washing with tur-
pentine alone. If thick films of varnish still remain,
and are unattacked, they had better be left alone and
the entire picture re-varnished with a harmless medium
like damar or mastic varnish.

The use of stale bread handled as an eraser, or the
use of soft rubber should not be resorted to, provided
turpentine, benzine or wood alcohol will remove the
surface dirt and varnish. Any form of abrasion may
become a menace for the obvious reason, that, if on
a flesh color madder lake was used as a glaze, it takes

Permanent Painting

very little rubbing to remove the one one-thousandth
of an inch of madder lake which has been applied for
a given effect, and which when removed leaves a
ghastly result.

Paintings that have turned yellow with age are best
treated by first placing them in the bright sunlight for
two or three days before the application or washing
with turpentine. In many instances where a brilliant
sky blue has turned to a dirty olive color, the sun
will bring back much of the pristine brilliancy, and
the rubbing with turpentine and a small percentage
of wood alcohol will bring out the colors sometimes
more brilliantly than they were on the day that they
were applied.

Where sulphur fumes have decomposed the lead
color and formed a brownish result, chemists have
recommended the use of peroxide of hydrogen, and
while this may be theoretically the proper method to
pursue, it is not necessary, and sometimes dangerous,
for the reason that even though peroxide of hydrogen
will bring back flake white and chrome yellow to
their original color, it may bleach an adjacent lake
beyond redemption, and as these sulphur de-composi-
tions of color are usually on the surface, the wood
alcohol and turpentine treatment with very slight abra-
sion, will produce all the results necessary. The
cleaning and renovation of pictures in the hands of
an intelligent person is not a very difficult problem,
but it is very easy to spoil any good painting by the

Permanent Painting

use of nostrums and recipes which are destructive in
their effect.

Very often a good picture assumes a bluish haze
commonly called "bloom," which remains on it for
years. It is due largely to the absorption of moisture
by the varnish itself, and can easily be removed by
a gentle application of two or three coats of turpen-
tine, each successively wiped off and then finally var-
nished with a good hard varnish like amber or a
mixture of amber, mastic and damar. Paintings that
have been glazed with asphaltum must, however, be
handled differently, for in the chapter on the "As-
phaltum and Bitumen," it will be noted that as-
phaltum becomes darker with exposure rather than
lighter, due to the liberation of carbon. This can be
almost invariably removed by slight rubbing with
turpentine and benzine, but inasmuch as it evidently
was the artist's original intention to produce a different
color effect by means of this glazing, the picture will
have a totally different tone value and effect when the
smut remaining from the asphaltum is removed, and
the restoration of a picture of this kind should be
given to some painter for re-glazing after the smutty
residue of the asphaltum bitumen is thoroughly washed
off.

After a picture has been thoroughly cleaned and
bleached by means of sunlight, it is essential to var-
nish it immediately. Two coats of thin varnish prop-
erly dried, particularly where the second coat is ap-

Photo-micrograph of cracks invisible to the naked eye
showing encysted matter and fissures.

Permane mting

ch are destructive in

nes a bluish haze

,' which remain? on it for

largely to the a' ^ture

removed by
turpen-
var-
hard \

vtre of amber, mastic and da that

have been glazed with asphaltum rr /be

handled differently, for in the chapter on the "As-
phaltum and Bitumen/' it will be noted that as-
phaltum becomes darker with exposure rather than
lighter, due to the libers • n be

almost invariably removed vith

turpentine and benzine, but vidently

was the artist's original i: ve a different

color effect by means of picture will

have a totally different t< \ effect

; remaining from tli ami

the restoration of a

M to some paintc utty

'ue of the asphab hed

\tre has .ea and

var-

!>afiieulai~ "' ' ' ; — coat is ap-

Permanent Painting

plied after the first coat is thoroughly dry, is by far
preferable to the application of one heavy coat of
varnish.

Permanent Painting

CHAPTER IX
THE SCHOOL OF IMPRESSIONISM

FROM time immemorial painters have depicted
scenes as they saw them. A blue sky was painted
with a mixture of white and blue. A sunset of
yellow and orange was painted with yellow and a
mixture of yellow and red. The principle upon which
all painting is executed is that there are three primary
pigments, red, yellow and blue, which, with the ad-
dition of white and black, furnish all the tints neces-
sary for the production of any given shade, or mix-
ture of complementary colors, so that if a green is
desired, yellow and blue may be mixed, and if a light
green is wanted, white is added, and if a dark green
is wanted either more blue or black is added.

Without going into the discussion of the physics
of this subject, it may be accepted that the result of
the mixture of two pigments is a subtractive phenom-
enon. In other words, when yellow and blue are
mixed, the yellow and the blue are simply subtracted
from the white light which falls on them with the re-
sult that green is obtained, and carrying out this theory
still further, if red, yellow and blue are mixed in their
proper proportions, each of these colors is subtracted

Permanent Painting

from the white light with the result that a pigment is
obtained which produces an approach to black, and
black is regarded as a minus or zero quantity.

In the blending of light we have the opposite effect,
so that when we take three colored lights, or allow the
rays which pass through sheets of glass composed
of scarlet, green and violet, to impinge upon each
other, we do not obtain a subtractive color but an
additive color; that is, these three colors falling upon
the same point form white. In other words, the sum
total of the colored rays of scarlet, green and violet
when added together are white, so that we have the
phenomenon that the primary pigments mixed to-
gether form black, and the primary color sensations
form white, and that the primary color sensations
are not identical with the primary colors but lie be-
tween or adjacent to the primary colors of the spec-
trum. That is, the color sensations are scarlet, green
and violet, while the primary colors are red, yellow
and blue. The spectrum, as is well known, is com-
posed of red, orange, yellow, green, blue, indigo and
violet. The pigments may always be expressed in the
form of paint and the color sensations may always be
produced by light.

The Lumiere Bros., of Lyons, France, having
worked upon the theory of the primary color sensa-
tions, developed the now well known process of color
photography. They arranged close together colored
starch grains tinted with transparent dyes, so that

Permanent Painting

when these starch grains are viewed by transmitted
light it is impossible to discern the scarlet from the
green or the violet, the result being that the mixture
produces what we call "white light." In photograph-
ing a yellow flower, and examining the yellow under
the microscope we find that it is composed of equal
parts of scarlet and green. True impressionistic
painting is based upon this phenomena with the prop-
er modifications for the obvious reason that it is prac-
tically impossible for any painter to put such small
dots or points of pigments of green and violet so that
when viewed at a distance they appear sky blue, and
yet when we take green and violet light, or green and
violet microscopic particles so small that the eye can-
not deferentiate, the resulting color is sky blue, and
not a mixture which the painter would expect it to
be, because, as has been already explained, the mix-
ture of pigments is subtractive and the mixture
of light and light sensations is additive. If, there-
fore, on a gray or neutral ground, a painter will paint
small patches of alternate pale green and pale violet
and such a composite is viewed from a distance of
fifteen or twenty feet or more, the resulting impression
will be sky blue. True impressionistic painting is
based entirely upon such phenomena.

There is one other influence which causes impression-
ism, which is due entirely to a defect of the eye. Those
who have been in a photographic dark room, which is
illuminated entirely by a red light, will have often no-

Permanent Painting

ticed that upon emerging from the dark room into
the white light, everything appeared green. This is
caused by the fact that in the first place, the physical
power of the nerve-fibrils of the eye which are sensi-
tive to red are temporarily exhausted, and the eye
sees only the complementary color which is green. If,
therefore, a brilliant red sunset is painted by means of
the massive application of scarlet and red, the foliage
may be gray, but after viewing it steadily for a few
moments it appears perfectly green, so that we have
a green impression where it really does not exist, be-
cause the eye complements one color for another.

Unfortunately the theory of impressionistic paint-
ing has not been properly disseminated and not prop-
erly taught, so that we have some of the vilest and
most impossible attempts at impressionistic painting
which are based not upon science, but upon the fads
which exist. Human beings are prone to say that
they admire a daub because some one else who is sup-
posed to know has pronounced it good, when as a
matter of fact, it possesses no merit whatever, and its
entire workmanship is so crude and so impossible that
it would make little or no difference even if it were
hung upside down.

There is a remarkable future for true impression-
istic painting, but there is no future and no "raison
d'etre" for the impossible daubs which masquerade
under the name of impressionistic painting, and if a
painter will study the theory as propounded by Ducos

Permanent Painting

Dunaron, which is not very difficult to learn, and will
study the chemistry of light as propounded by Vogel
and Rood, he or she will be able with a little practice
to master the new branch of the art which is coupled
with a science. The danger of applying masses of
paint in promontory patches which are likely to dry
rapidly and crack or peel have their own significance,
for impressionistic painting may be plastic, but its
plasticity should really be produced by means of light
and shade effects.

Permanent Painting

CHAPTER X
VOLATILE SOLVENTS

THE two oldest solvents known are turpentine and
lavender oil, but from the data at hand, it is
very likely that lavender oil was known many
centuries before turpentine. Chemically, lavender oil
is analogous to turpentine, in fact, it is a species of
turpentine containing an aromatic ingredient. Laven-
der oil is not used at present by oil painters to any great
extent, but turpentine is largely used.

Vibert was the first great painter to recommend the
use of benzine as a diluent for paint, and on this sub-
ject much is to be said. Vibert did not believe in the
use of linseed oil, but used a resin varnish reduced
with benzine. Benzine is nothing more nor less than
the same material of lower gravity as what we know
under the name of gasolene, petroleum essence, pe-
troleum spirits, or naphtha, and is identical in chemical
composition with the material used as a motive power
in automobiles. There is another material which is
spelled with an "e," "benzene," whereas the petroleum
essence is spelled with an "i," benzine. The chemical
name for benzene is benzol, but this is never to be
recommended for oil painting, as its solvent power

Permanent Painting

is much too great. If benzol (benzene) were used
by a painter as a diluent over a freshly painted sur-
face, it would dissolve the work of yesterday. For
the purposes of uniformity, I shall refer to petroleum
spirits as naphtha, which is the name by which it is
best known in America. It has the advantage over
turpentine that it evaporates much more rapidly, and
leaves no residue, nor does it exert any drying influ-
ence by itself.

Permanent Painting

CHAPTER XI
PICTURE VARNISHES

THERE are on the market no less than nine
different varnishes sometimes sold under fan-
ciful names, out of which only three are rec-
ommended. The varnishes used are damar, sandarac,
amber, copal, shellac, spirit varnish, oil copal and
mastic. There may be some excuse for the use of
spirit varnishes such as shellac or sandarac, which
are made by dissolving these two gums in alcohol, and
adding a small percentage of oil to prevent them from
becoming too brittle. . The principal advantage in us-
ing a spirit varnish /is that it dries dust free in 10
or 15 minutes, but inasmuch as a spirit varnish binds
very poorly on a linseed oil film, it is not to be recom-
mended.

The use of oil copal varnishes, excepting where old
paintings are to be imitated, is likewise to be depre-
cated, for no copal varnish which is made by fusing
copal or kauri gum with linseed oil retains its original
color, or absence of color. If a piece of wood is
painted with flake white or zinc white and varnished
with an oil copal varnish, it will be found that when
it is placed in a dark closet, it turns a dirty yellow at
the end of three months, and if the experiment is

Permanent Painting

repeated, mastic or damar being used, it is found that
no change in color takes place. Therefore, the only
excuse for using an oil copal or oil kauri varnish is
that if an old master is copied, the effect of time and
the yellowing of age can be imitated. This can be best
accomplished by the use of an oil varnish, and putting
the painting away in a dark corner.

Mastic varnish is perhaps the most reliable of all.
It is made by dissolving gum mastic in spirits of
turpentine, this solution taking place in the cold and
with occasional shaking. After the solution has been
obtained, it is necessary to filter it either through cot-
ton or filter paper. When placed away and allowed
to ripen with age, it produces a flexible, glossy varnish,
the life of which is generally conceded to be ten years.

Perhaps the next in the line is damar varnish, al-
though this varnish is not as flexible as mastic, nor is
the life of damar much over five years, but neither mas-
tic nor damar turn yellow with age unless some drying
oil is added to them.

Bleached and orange shellac when dissolved in
methyl or ethyl alcohol have been used for many years
as picture varnishes. Both of these varnishes arc
very opaque when made in the usual way, so that in
order to clarify them, they are either filtered many
times, or quick-silver vermilion is shaken with the
varnishes, which after a day or two carries down the
wax, and leaves a layer of clear varnish. This clear
varnish is often sold under the name of French var-

Permanent Painting

nish, and is frequently mixed with either oil of laven-
der or oil of bergamot to produce flexibility. If pro-
gressive drying takes place under a varnish of this
type, surface cracks are likely to ensue for obvious rea-
sons,* and this is true of every varnish when applied
before a painting be properly dry, but more so of the
quick and hard drying varnishes.

There is much varnish sold under the name of
amber varnish, which is made of a fossil kauri resin,
and there is no doubt that the fossil kauri resin is
superior to the genuine amber. It is a popular fallacy
to suppose that the ancients used amber varnish, for
it is very likely that they called all hard resins amber.
True amber must be so thoroughly tempered with oil,
and is so very difficult to fuse, and dries so very slow-
ly, that its use is not recommended, and where it is
properly fused it is almost black on account of the
high heat necessary for melting.

The conclusion to be arrived at from the foregoing
statements is that only two varnishes should be used
for ordinary purposes, damar and mastic, and of the
two mastic is preferable. It can be purchased from
reliable firms, but where there is any doubt as to its
purity, it can be very easily made by dissolving a pound
of mastic in a quart of pure spirits of turpentine.
When properly made, it has the color of refined lin-
seed oil. It is better to use it in a thin layer than to
make a thick solution and flow it on.

* See chapter on "The Cause of the Cracking of Paintings and the
Remedies."

Permanent Painting

CHAPTER XII
DRIERS

THE use of driers in artistic painting is as
someone stated "an invention of the devil."
Copal megilp, which is merely super-saturated
drying oil, has ruined many a good painting. There
are circumstances where the use of a drier for ar-
tistic painting is permissible, such as, for instance,
interior wall decorations where freedom from dust
is essential, or for temporary painting for the pur-
poses of reproduction for colored or black and white
illustrations in books or magazines, but for portrait
or landscape painting where the painter desires per-
manence, driers are to be deprecated.

The pigments themselves have peculiar characteris-
tics in this regard (see chapter on "The drying quali-
ties of pigments"), and the painter may help himself
in case he desires a painting to dry rapidly, for if he
has dark colors which do not dry, all the umbers and
siennas are rapid driers, and if he has light colors
which he desires to dry he may use in any instance
spirits of turpentine and sunlight.

Turpentine is an excellent drier and perfectly harm-
less. It is quite true that it flattens the color, but this

Permanent Painting

is no objection, because the free use of turpentine en-
ables the painter to varnish his picture so much the
sooner, and the use of sunlight is also of great assist-
ance, for we have absolute evidence that zinc white,
which is at first a slow drier, dries progressively un-
til it becomes brittle, but may be made to dry rapidly
in the beginning by simply exposing it to bright light.
Ordinary zinc white when mixed with raw linseed oil
and placed in the dark, will remain soft and wet
sometimes as long as ten days, yet on a bright, clear
spring or summer day when exposed to the bright light
it will skin over and dry in 12 hours. Care, how-
ever, must always be taken never to expose a fresh
painting to the heat of the summer sun, for linseed
oil before it has begun to oxidize melts like wax. A
current of air is likewise an effective drier, and some
painters use the precaution of surrounding a painting
with a curtain of cheese cloth which keeps the dust
from it, but admits the air.

Driers decompose many pigments. In fact, nearly
every one of the lake colors is rapidly affected by the
action of driers. Madder lake, when mixed with a
lead or manganese drier, soon loses its pristine bril-
liancy.

Permanent Painting

CHAPTER XIII
LINSEED OIL AND OTHER DRYING OILS

THE principal oils used by painters are linseed
oil and poppy oil, and occasionally a little wal-
nut oil. Linseed oil in its normal state is
the best and the only oil that a painter should use.
Walnut oil is paler than linseed oil, but dries much
slower, while poppy oil is the palest of all the nut
oils, and dries slower than walnut oil.

Linseed oil is the oil extracted from flax-seed and
while there may be a great deal of talk concerning
adulterated oils, it must be said in justice to the man-
ufacturers of artists materials that in no instance has
the author ever found a single sample of oil which was
labeled linseed oil that contained any impurity what-
ever, so that it is perfectly safe for any painter to
buy linseed oil from a credited manufacturer, and rest
secure in the knowledge that the material is abso-
lutely pure.

The great objection, however, to the purchase of
the majority of samples of linseed oil for artistic
painting, is that the oil is generally refined or bleached,
which is a serious mistake. Refined or bleached lin-
seed oil means linseed oil in which the color is hid-

Permanent Painting

den, for in the bleaching of linseed oil the color is not
extracted, it is simply changed from a greenish color
to a barely visible yellow. *

The point which the author wishes to bring out is
that the painter is far better off, if he is going to use
linseed oil for the reduction of his pigments, to use
only raw linseed oil unbleached, but well settled. If
the yellowish green, or the decidedly yellow raw lin-
seed oil is used, the painter has the advantage in that
the resulting mixture with white or light pigments
will never grow much darker, and the highest tones
that are produced are tones which the subsequent
painting will show. On the other hand, if the bleached
and almost colorless linseed oil is used, it cannot bleach
any further, and if the painting is put away in a dark
place, it is bound to grow darker on account of the
generation of the original coloring matter in the oil.
In other words, the coloring matter contained in
bleached oil reverts with many pigments like flake
white and zinc white to its original greenish state.
Painters will do well to bear this in mind when paint-
ing portraits. The use of bleached de-colorized lin-
seed, poppy, or walnut oils is to be deprecated under
all circumstances.

Linseed oil dries much better in the sunlight than
it does in the dark.

The recommendation which one reads quite fre-

* For a more scientific treatment of this subject, the reader is re-
ferred to page 32, on the "Photo-Chemical Deterioration of oil paint-
ings."

Permanent Painting

quently, that a painter should press linseed oil for
his own uses, is just as ridiculous in these days as the
recommendation that a painter should grind his own
colors. Pure raw linseed oil is obtainable in every
civilized community, and what a painter should do is
to buy a gallon of it, place it in small bottles which
are corked only with a tuft of cotton and stand them
on a shelf where they may remain for years, although
it is unwise for a painter to use linseed oil which is
more than five years old, because it is likely to de-
compose and become what is technically termed as
"fatty," which is equal to a kind of rancidity that we
generally associate with the edible fats. At the same
time, linseed oil that has become slightly thickened
with age is of great value when mixed with the dry-
ing pigments, such as zinc oxide and umber, because
a film is obtained which is far more flexible than that
obtained with the aid of driers.

When linseed oil is boiled it becomes very much
paler than it is in its raw state. This may sound like
a contradiction, because nearly all boiled oils are dark,
but that is due to the fact that they are generally
boiled with a drier like lead or manganese, and these
metals go into solution and form chemical soaps
which alter the color of the oil. Any painter may try
the experiment himself by taking raw linseed oil, plac-
ing it in a clean agate-ware dish, and heating it slowly
and carefully until it begins to froth. On cooling, it will
be noted that the oil is somewhat thicker and very much

Permanent Painting

paler, and in addition to this, it dries in much less time
than it does in its raw state. Such oil should never
be used with the quick-drying pigments, but may be
very safely used with all the blacks, zinc white, per-
manent white and any of the lakes, but boiled linseed
oil which contains an added drier like manganese,
litharge, zinc or lime, should never be used with any
lake pigment.

Linseed oil in the process of drying goes through
a very peculiar transformation. It generates both
carbonic acid and water.*

Even assuming that every pigment is dry when it
is ground with oil for the painters' use, we can there-
fore readily see that if flake white is mixed with an
ultramarine blue, a sulphide of lead is likely to result,
owing to the generation of water in the actual drying
of the paint itself.

The painter is probably aware of the fact that lin-
seed oil, poppy oil and walnut oil, but linseed oil par-
ticularly, dry from the top down. In other words,
a skin is first formed, and underneath this skin the
paint remains soft sometimes for years. Graphite
and lampblack show this peculiar phenomenon more
than any other pigment. Either of these two will
dry on the surface, and sometimes a year afterward
will be soft and wet underneath the skin which has
formed.

* To those interested in the chemical philosophy of this subject,
the author refers the reader to page 82, "Chemistry & Technology of
Mixed Paints," by Maximilian Toch.

Permanent Painting

Linseed oil increases in bulk when it dries, which
means that it does not dry by evaporation like tur-
pentine, but dries by what we know as oxidation. It
absorbs oxygen from the air, and forms a material
which is known among chemists as linoxin, and linox-
in is nothing more nor less than dry linseed oil or ox-
idized linseed oil. A film of linseed oil paint in-
creases in size depending upon the nature of the seed
from which it is made, from 10 to 20%, which ac-
counts for the wrinkling which very frequently takes
place. To obviate this wrinkling painters do not add
additional oil to their paint, but add turpentine, or
benzine.

Photograph of an oil painting showing serious cracking
throughout, due to the contraction of the paint. Not
sufficient sizing material had been applied to the canvas
before the painting was executed, which is evidenced by
the warp and woof of the canvas showing through the
paint.

nan en t Painting

-reases in bulk when it dries, which
^t does ; vaporation like tur-

ow as oxidation

orms a material

whi< oxin, and linox-

<>d oil or ox-

'i. A film ii paint in-

/e depending upon ti the seed

i which it is made, frot hich ac-

counts for the wrinkling which akes

place. To obviate this wrinkling add

additional oil to their paint, but add turpentine, or
benzine.

iio i
\ oi
i)nit tui

.litinq

Permanent Painting

CHAPTER XIV

CLASSIFICATION OF THE PIGMENTS
AND THEIR DESCRIPTION

The pigments which are in use, and a fairly complete
list of those found on the market throughout the civ-
ilized world, are as follows :

List of Colors

Alizarin Crimson
Alizarin Orange
Alizarin Scarlet
Alizarin Yellow
Alizarin Green
Alizarin Carmine
Alumina White or

Lake White
Antwerp Blue
Asphaltum
Aurelian
Bistre
Bitumen
Black Lead
Blue Black
Blue Verditer
Bone Brown
Brilliant Ultramarine

Blue

Bronze Green
Brown Madder
Brown Lake
Brown Ochre

Brown Pink
Burnt Carmine
Burnt Roman Ochre
Burnt Sienna
Burnt Umber
Cadmium Yellow
Cadmium Yellow Pale
Caledonian Brown
Cappah Brown
Carbon Black
Carmine
Carmine Lake
Carnation Lake
Cassel Earth
Cerulean Blue
Charcoal Gray
Chinese Blue
Chinese Vermilion
Chinese White
Chrome Greens, 1,2 &3
Chrome Orange
Chrome Oxide
Chrome Red

Permanent Painting

Cinnabar Greens, 1, 2

Citron Yellow

Cobalt Blue

Cobalt Green

Cobalt Violet

Cologne Earth

Constant White

Copal Megilp

Cork Black

Cremnitz White

Crimson Lake

Crimson Madder

Davey's Gray

Deep Madder

Emerald Green

Extract of Vermilion

Field's Orange, Ver-
milion

Flake White

French Blue

French Ultramarine

French Vermilion

French Veronese Green

Foundation White

Gallstone

Gamboge

Geranium Lake

Geranium Madder

Gold Ochre

Green Lakes, 2 & 3

Harrison Red

Hooker's Green, 1 & 2

Indian Lake

Indian Purple (Oil)

Indian Purple (Water)

Indian Red

Indian Yellow

Indigo

Italian Pink

Ivory Black

Jacqueminot Madder

Jaune Brilliant

King's Yellow (Oil)

King's Yellow (Water)

Lamp Black

Leitch's Blue

Lemon Yellow

Light Red

Madder Carmine

Madder Carmine, extra

Madder Lake

Magenta

Malachite Green

Mars Brown

Mars Orange ^

Mars Red

Mars Violet

Mars Yellow

Mauve

Mauve Lake

Megilp

Mineral Gray

Minium

Monochrome Tints

(warm)
Monochrome Tints

(cool)

Permanent Painting

Mummy

Naples Yellow (Oil)
"Naples Yellow, Light
Naples Yellow, French
Naples Yellow, Medium
Naples Yellow, Deep
Naples Yellow, Reddish
Naples Yellow, Green-
ish

Neutral Orange
Neutral Tint (Oil)
Neutral Tint (Water)
New Blue
Nottingham White
Olive Green (Oil)
Olive Green (Water)
Olive Lake
Olive Madder
Orange Madder
Orange Mineral
Orange Vermilion
Orient Madder
Orpiment
Oxford Ochre
Oxide of Chromium,
Oxide of Chromium,

Transparent
Payne's Gray (Oil)
Payne's Gray (Water)
Permanent Blue
Permanent Green, Lt.
Permanent Green, Med.
Permanent Green, Deep
Permanent Violet

Permanent White
Permanent Yellow
Pink Madder
Primrose Aureolin
Primrose Yellow
Prussian Blue
Prussian Brown
Prussian Green (Oil)
Prussian Green

(Water)
Pure Scarlet
Purple Lake
Purple Madder
Raw Sienna
Raw Umber
Rembrandt's Madder
Roman Ochre
Roman Ochre (cool)
Roman Sepia
Rose Doree
Rose Lake
Rose Madder
Rubens Madder
Sap Green (Water)
Sap Green (Oil)
Scarlet Lake
Scarlet Madder
Scarlet Red
Scarlet Vermilion
Sepia (Oil)
Sepia (Water)
Silver White
Sky Blue
Smalt

Permanent Painting

Terra Rose Verona Brown

Terre Verte Veronese Green

Tours Red Violet Carmine
Tours Orange Mineral Viridian

Transparent Gold Warm Sepia

Ochre Yellow Carmine

Tuscan Red Yellow Lake
Ultramarine (Genuine) Yellow Ochre

Ultramarine Ash Zinc White

Vandyke Brown Zinnober Green, light

Vandyke Madder Zinnober Green, extra
Venetian Red light

Verdigris Zinnober Green, Me-
Vermilion dium

Vermilion, pale Zinnober Green, Deep

Later I shall attempt to separate these pigments into
various classes. First, the pigments which can be
indiscriminately mixed with each other, and will not
interact and are not affected by light. Second, pig-
ments which alone are permanent, but which cannot
be mixed with each other. Third, pigments which
are fairly permanent under normal conditions, but
not permanent when exposed to strong sunlight.
Fourth, pigments which are fugitive, and which should
under all circumstances be excluded from the artist's
palette, existing only for the purpose of illustration
for half-tone color work, and for use in illustrations
in magazines. Perhaps the only excuse for the use
of the fugitive pigments is for the purpose just re-
ferred to, but even then every possible shade and

Permanent Painting

gradation of color can be obtained by the use of the
more permanent colors.

ALIZARIN COLORS (RED)

The alizarin colors are identical in composition with
all the madder lakes, and up to the last generation the
madder root was specially cultivated for the purpose
of making a permanent red lake. The growing of the
madder plant and the extraction of the color from
the root, was a great industry in France. The red
trousers worn by the French military were dyed with
madder, in order to give the proper impetus to this
industry, but with the advent of the coal tar dyes, an
artificial madder was produced which is known as
alizarin. This is identical in every respect with the
color extracted from the root of the plant. The botan-
ical name of the plant is Rubia Tinctorium, and as
such was known to the Flemish and Italian painters.

Alizarin or madder lake may be considered as a
permanent color under certain conditions. Franz Hals
was well aware of the correct way in which to use this
lake in order to produce the vivid flesh tints of his
countrymen. Rubicond noses and sunburnt cheeks
were portrayed by him in a manner which after a
lapse of three centuries have shown that this color,
when intelligently used, is permanent.

If madder lake is used as a glaze over a color which

Permanent Painting

has been allowed to dry thoroughly, it will remain
permanent, but if madder or alizarin lake is mixed
with any mineral or metallic color such as ochre, lead,
sienna, etc., a chemical decomposition takes place, with
the result that the lake is bleached. It is reasonable
to suppose that Rembrandt did not glaze his flesh
paints in the way that Franz Hals and Jan Steen did,
as the flesh tints of the Rembrandt's of to-day are
more or less bleached. The "Anatomy Lesson" in the
Hague, shows upon close examination that the flesh
tones of the demonstrator and the spectators have
suffered from exposure to light, very likely due to
the fact that the lake used in glazing was mixed with
the under-coat. It is, therefore, reasonable to assume
that alizarin or madder lakes should be used as glaz-
ing colors over a properly dried surface. Alizarin
or madder lakes, however, will not decompose when
mixed with various blacks such as black lead, ivory
black, lamp black and carbon black. .

Madder lake may be mixed with any oxide of iron
color which has been burnt, but may not be mixed with
any raw iron color. For instance, madder or alizarin
may be mixed with Indian red, forming a color known
as Tuscan red, which is perfectly permanent. It may
also be mixed with burnt sienna, burnt ochre, burnt
umber, etc., but is fugitive when mixed with raw ochre,
raw sienna or raw umber. The chemical colors like
flake white (white lead), zinc oxide, chrome yellow,
Naples yellow and chrome green all bleach it, but

Permanent Painting

colors like quick silver, vermilion, cadmium yellow and
all of the blacks do not affect it.

The safest way in which to use it is as a glaze over
a ground which is thoroughly dry. Madder lake deep-
ens considerably when placed in a dark place, but is
revived when subjected to bright sunlight.

ALIZARIN YELLOW AND GREEN

These two colors are taken as one, for the reason
that both alizarin yellow and alizarin green do not ex-
ist, all the alizarin colors up to date being of a red
or maroon shade. The name, therefore, is a misnomer,
and should not be permitted.

Alizarin yellow is a fairly permanent yellow lake
made of an aniline yellow. There are, however, some
alizarin yellows on the market which are made from
the extracts of bark like quer citron, and these are not
permanent. The author has made a yellow lake from
the paranitraniline which is perfectly permanent when
used alone, has great brilliancy and strength, but can-
not by any means be called an alizarin yellow.

The same is true of alizarin green, which as such,
does not exist, and all the so-called alizarin greens on
the market are not permanent, but are green lakes
made from coal tar dyes which readily decompose
when they are mixed with ochre or any one of the
oxide of iron colors. The use of both of these colors
is unwarranted.

Permanent Painting

ALUMINA WHITE OR LAKE WHITE

This is the hydrated oxide of alumina which is
ground in linseed oil, and is almost as transparent as
glass. It is simply used as a medium for reducing or
attenuating other pigments as, for instance, when it
is desirable to glaze with burnt sienna, it is of advan-
tage to mix burnt sienna with alumina, because in
that way the burnt sienna assumes all the qualities of
a lake color. Alumina is permanent, and is not af-
fected by other pigments. As however, the amount of
oil necessary to grind alumina into the paste form is
very large, the oil contained in the mixture is prone
to turn yellow. It has a variety of advantages, how-
ever, which makes it exceedingly useful and can be
generally recommended.

ANTWERP BLUE

Antwerp blue is either a mixture of Prussian blue
or Chinese blue with aluminum hydrate, in other words,
it is a Prussian blue reduced with a transparent base,
and is not to be recommended where absolute perma-
nency is desired. Of itself, or when mixed with zinc
white, it produces very beautiful sky blue shades, and
if properly varnished and painted on a solid surface,
such as metal or wood, shows no change for many
years, but when Antwerp blue is mixed with flake
white or zinc white and reduced with raw linseed oil,

Permanent Painting

it turns decidedly green in a dark place, or in a poorly
lighted studio, but regains its brilliant color when ex-
posed to sunlight and air again. It is a weak form of
Prussian blue used as a glaze, and is now superseded
by ultramarine blue mixed with a transparent black.

ASPHALTUM

This is the same as bitumen and is a black gum, va-
rieties of which are found in Africa, Cuba and the
United States. It is a great mistake for artists' material
manufacturers to sell asphaltum or bitumen to paint-
ers or to carry it in stock, as it is not only worthless,
but has a tendency to ruin a painting on which it is
used. When mixed with other pigments, it retards
their drying. When used as a glazing color, it is
frequently a cause of so-called alligator cracks, owing
to the unequal expansion and contraction between it
and the base upon which it is applied, but the worst
feature of it is that when it is exposed to sunlight, it
decomposes into charcoal and water, and deposits a
black soot on the picture. To those who are interested
in a scientific dissertation on this subject, I would
refer them to the article on the "Influence of Sun
Light on Paints," Journal, Society of Chemical In-
dustry, which systematically explains the effect of light
on the hydro-carbon compounds, but as this is not a
work on chemistry, the scientific illustrations will be
omitted.

Permanent Painting

Asphaltum or bitumen is harmful in every sense of
the word, and it is very doubtful whether the great
masters ever used it. In Italy it was used to a great-
er extent than in Flanders, for there are still many
old pictures to be found in Italy which are a black
smudge with here and there a faint trace of lighter
pigment. This black smudge was once a bright mass
of colors glazed with bitumen, which can be revived by
cleaning carefully with methyl alcohol.

A glaze which is permanent can be made in imita-
tion of asphaltum by mixing raw sienna, burnt umber
and carbon black or ivory black.

AURELIAN

Aurelian is a pigment that has been introduced dur-
ing the last generation, and is sometimes sold under
the name of cobalt yellow. It is a double nitrite of
cobalt and potassium. There is a variation of opinion
as to its permanency. Some claim that it is absolutely
permanent both in water and oil, and others claim that
it decomposes with a white, but from the experiments
made by the author its permanence depends entirely
upon its purity. If the color is thoroughly washed by
the manufacturer after it is precipitated in order to
free it from soluble salts, it may be regarded as ab-
solutely permanent, because it is not affected by sul-
phur gases nor by sunlight. If the color is impure,
it is very likely to decompose any lake which may be

Permanent Painting

added to it, and when mixed with raw linseed oil, it
loses its brilliancy in a short time. There are several
good manufacturers of this pigment, whose aurelian
yellow may be used and regarded as absolutely perma-
nent. For safety's sake, it is advisable to use it alone
and not to mix it with any lake pigment. Lake glazed
over it, after it is perfectly dry, does not affect either
the lake or the aurelian.

AURORA YELLOW (See Cadmium Colors)
BISTRE

This is a species of lamp black, which is the soot
from the smoke of pitch pine. In the condensation, a
small percentage of resin is admixed which probably
accounts for the brownish color of this soot. It may
be regarded as permanent, but when mixed with oil
dries very badly. It is a deep brown, but it has been
asserted that better or more permanent effects can be
obtained by a mixture of lamp black and umber. It is
used as a water color as well as an oil color.

BITUMEN (See Asphaltum)

BLACK LEAD

This pigment is composed principally of graphite,
which is the material used for making lead pencils.
It is a form of carbon, and varies in purity from
60% to 90%, the other constituents being silica and

Permanent Painting

clay. Black lead is popularly known under the name
of "stove polish." It has a metallic steel gray sheen,
both when used as a water color and as an oil color, and
gives delicate grays which are free from blue. It is
one of the permanent colors, and has absolutely no
effect whatever upon any color with which it may be
mixed. It is an exceedingly slow drier, and when it
does dry it remains soft, so that care must be exer-
cised not to use it too thickly, for, after it skins over
and dries from the top, the interior may remain soft
for years. In making a gray by mixing with zinc
white, it has the advantage of neutralizing the even-
tual brittleness produced by the zinc, and may be
regarded under every circumstance as a perfectly soft
and permanent pigment. The hard drying colors such
as zinc, red lead, orange mineral, umber, etc., should
be used with great care over black lead, for the ob-
vious reason that cracks are bound to result, owing
to the non-equal tension in drying. *

BLUE BLACK

This is a species of vine black and charcoal, and
derives its name from the fact that when mixed with
white, it produces a very pleasing bluish gray, which
is absolutely permanent. Blue black is an excellent
drier, in fact, so much so, that the pigment will some-
times dry up entirely in the tube. Blue black is slight-

* See chapter on the Cracking of Oil Paintings, p. 40.

Permanent Painting

I

ly alkaline, which accounts for its excellent drying
properties, and likewise accounts for its livering in the
tube. When once it has livered, it cannot very well be
restored to its original condition. There are, however,
a number of good lamp blacks on the market sold in
tube form, which are as fine, if not finer, than blue
black and produce practically the same shade.

Of the various samples examined, no two manufac-
turers appear to use the same material. In one in-
stance, the author found the pigment to be composed
of vine black, which is a species of charcoal. In an-
other instance a very pure lamp black appeared to be
the base, which when mixed with white tinted out to
a relatively blue gray, and in a third instance, it ap-
peared to be a mixture of charcoal tinted with Prus-
sian blue. All three of these pigments may be re-
garded as permanent, for very particular uses in paint-
ing, particularly in landscape painting for producing
sombre sky effects.

Blue black may be mixed with zinc in any propor-
tion, and while it is not so slow a drier as graphite
or lamp black, it has relatively the same effect on
zinc and prevents it from becoming brittle.

BLUE VERDITER

Blue verditer is the hydrated oxide of copper, but
inasmuch as it is made by precipitating a copper so-
lution with lime, it is not always permanent in the

Permanent Painting

tubes, for it has the property of combining with the
oil and stiffening into a livery compound. It is quite
a defective color, and should not be used for perma-
nent painting, for the reason that hydrogen sulphide
blackens it and sulphuric acid bleaches it, and when it
contains traces of lime it dries exceedingly hard and
is liable to crack.

The same shade may be obtained by mixing such
permanent pigments as ultramarine, zinc oxide and
hydrated chrome oxide, these three being unaffected
by sulphureted hydrogen.

BONE BROWN

This is one of the pigments which has no license to
exist. When bones are fully calcined they produce
a very desirable black color, but when bones are partly
calcined the color is brown, owing to the production
of what is known as bone pitch. In chemical compo-
sition, bone pitch is the same as asphaltum, and this
accounts for the fact that bone brown is a very bad
drier and is not permanent to light. The same effects
may be produced by the use of many other more
durable colors. Bone brown should be stricken from
the list of artists' colors.

BRILLIANT ULTRAMARINE BLUE

Brilliant ultramarine blue is assumed to be the
artificial ultramarine blue which is made by calcining

Permanent Painting

sulphur, clay and sulphate of soda. It is permanent
to light when used alone and when used with certain
of the colors upon which it has no influence, and will
be properly described under ultramarine blue.

BRONZE GREEN

This is a mixture of orange chrome yellow and
Prussian blue. When pure, it is not affected by sun-
light, and when properly varnished, and protected is
unaffected by sulphureted hydrogen.

There is, however, no reason why bronze green
should be made from chrome yellow, as where possible
all lead colors should be avoided by the painter. Cad-
mium yellow and Prussian blue make a very perma-
nent bronze green which is permanent but more ex-
pensive than the chrome yellow pigment.

BROWN MADDER

Brown madder differs nowadays from the brown
madder made 50 years ago. Formerly the madder
brown was prepared from madder root, and tinted with
a solid pigment, such as burnt ochre or burnt sienna
Brown madder is now made in the same chemical
manner in which the red madder is made, with the
exception that the color is practically spoiled in the
making by the addition of iron oxide, because inas-
much as iron compounds exert a continuous reducing

Permanent Painting

action on the pigment, brown madder soon loses its
brilliancy and is destroyed. It may be regarded as a
fairly permanent color, but can be replaced in several
ways, and is therefore not to be recommended.

All the qualities of this pigment are described under
the head of alizarin or madder lake. When mixed
with a metallic color like lead, zinc or iron it is not
permanent. When used alone and made of madder
lake and lamp black it is permanent.

BROWN LAKE

This may be any red or maroon lake of an organic
nature either calcined the same as burnt carmine or
saddened by the admixture of an iron compound.
When made in the latter manner it is permanent for
two or three years. When made in the former manner
it is very fugitive.

Brown lake made by mixing madder lake and burnt
amber is permanent and dries very well. Some paint-
ers make a perfect brown by mixing lamp black, cad-
mium and madder lake. This mixture is permanent,
but has the disadvantage of drying very slowly.

BROWN OCHRE

Brown ochre is similar in composition to all the
other ochres, being a form of clay tinted naturally with
iron ores or the hydrated oxide of iron. It is known

Permanent Painting

also under the name of Oxford ochre, and sometimes
deep Roman ochre, and when used alone is permanent,
but when mixed with any white pigment it turns con-
siderably darker after a lapse of several years.

Brown ochre must never be used with any lake color
because the iron oxide in it has a destructive effect. It
is a good drier, and when properly thinned out may be
used as a glaze. It is analogous to raw sienna, but is
considerably weaker in tinting power.

A very dark ochre may contain nearly 40% hy-
drated oxide of iron, whereas French ochres contain
only 20%, and are therefore nearer in composition
to siennas. It has a tendency, when exposed to strong
sunlight for a long time, to darken, which is evidently
due to the change in the oxide of iron. It is otherwise
an exceedingly permanent color, but has a destructive
influence on all lakes with which it may be mixed. It
is a good drier.

BROWN PINK

Brown pink is similar in composition to Dutch pink
and Italian pink. It is a transparent olive yellow like
all of its progenitors. It is made from either the
Persian berry or quercitron bark, and when made from
a vegetable coloring matter of this kind, has little or
no value as a permanent pigment. It is very easily
decomposed in the presence of many of the metallic
pigments, and when mixed with zinc or used as a glaze

Permanent Painting

will fade in the bright sunlight perceptibly in four
weeks.

For experimental purposes, however the author has
made a color of this nature on the paranitraniline ser-
ies which, when used alone over a dry surface, is prac-
tically permanent and does not bleach in the light, but
darkens very slightly. Brown pink after a year is
useless as a permanent color and is not recommended.
Neither can the transparent yellow made by the author
be recommended at this writing, because the color has
only been under observation for four years.

BURNT CARMINE

Burnt carmine is made from ordinary carmine or car-
mine lake by heating it until the organic matter begins
to char, so that what we really have is a decomposition
of the color and an increase in the percentage of car-
bon. If you, therefore, take a lake and mix it with
carbon black, you obtain practically the same results.
At the same time, any burnt lake of the carmine or
scarlet or crimson order is a fugitive color, weak in
hiding power, poor in glazing properly, but effects are
obtained which are regarded as desirable by some. A
burnt lake should really not be used by any painter.
It may be a very beautiful color, and it may possibly
have some uses for interior decoration where brilliancy
is not required, but from the standpoint of the artists'
palette, it is unfortunate that this color was ever in-

Permanent Painting

vented for a four weeks' exposure to the midsummer's
sun decomposed it almost beyond recognition.

Any madder with a touch of lampblack produces the
same result, and color manufacturers could produce
such a combination under the name of permanent
burnt lake.

BROWN ROMAN OCHRE

This is a species of dark ochre obtained by burning
the ochre and driving off the water which it contains,
thus producing a rich brown which has some similarity
to burnt sienna, but is very much weaker. It is a
very permanent color. When mixed with whites it
does not fade, but after eighteen months becomes
slightly darker, if that term may be used in conjunc-
tion with it, but in spite of its darkening it loses none
of its pristine brilliancy, and was one of the colors
used by the early Italian painters with excellent
results.

When ground in pure linseed oil, it has a tendency
to harden in the tube, but may be broken up and used
freely. It has very little hiding power, and may there-
fore be used as a glazing color. It has less effect
upon the decomposition of madder lake than its un-
burnt progenitor.

BURNT SIENNA

This is a material very much similar in composition
to burnt ochre, excepting that its content of oxide of

Permanent Painting

iron is very much larger, and the physical character-
istics differ from those of ochre. Ochre is opaque and
burnt sienna is translucent. Burnt sienna is one of
the most permanent colors in existence, excepting
perhaps, the lighter shades which have not been so
well calcined, and these have a strong tendency to
darken and become redder. As a glazing color, it
has valuable properties, and it can be mixed with
lake colors. Painters generally allow the sienna to
dry thoroughly, and then glaze a lake color over it.
Exceedingly rich tints are produced in this manner
which are absolutely permanent, providing the lake
itself is permanent.

The mars colors are nearly all artificial siennas and
are just as permanent. Burnt sienna is an excellent
drier and will mix with almost every other perma-
nent color.

BURNT UMBER

Burnt umber is similar to burnt sienna. It con-
tains oxides of manganese and iron. It is made by
heating raw umber, which is a dark olive green color,
but when heated is converted into a pleasing brown.
It is a permanent color, and one of the best drying pig-
ments in existence; so much so, that many painters
mix umber with their pigments for producing dark
backgrounds in order to obtain a good drying surface.

Burnt umber has more hiding power (opacity) than

Permanent Painting

the sienna colors and is perfectly permanent and re-
liable. Care must be exercised not to paint it over
a soft or semi-dry ground or cracks will result.

CADMIUM YELLOW

This description comprises all of the cadmium colors
from the palest yellow to the deepest orange. All of
the cadmium colors are manufactured by precipitat-
ing a salt of cadmium with a salt containing a sul-
phide, so that the cadmiums are sulphides of cadmium,
and according to the speed of precipitation, tempera-
ture of the solutions, admixture of acids or alkalies,
all shades from brilliant yellow to the deepest orange
are formed.

All writers practically agree in stating, and the
experiments of the author confirm it, that cadmium
yellow may be regarded as a perfectly permanent
pigment. The artistic painter is fortunate in having
such a brilliant color at his command. Much has
been written on the supposed reactions that take
place between this and other pigments. It is said,
though being a sulphide, it should not be mixed with
a lead color, because the sulphur in the cadmium
would combine with the lead with a blackening effect.
Ordinarily, this is not so. Cadmium sulphide is a
very stable chemical compound, and will not give up
its sulphur as readily as artificial ultramarine blue

Permanent Painting

will ; for instance, there should therefore be no hesi-
tancy in using cadmium sulphide with any lead com-
pound, although, to make assurance doubly sure,
zinc white could be used as when a cadmium color
is mixed with zinc there can not possibly be any visi-
ble effect of decomposition.

It is unfortunate, perhaps, that cadmium sulphide is
so very expensive. The dry pigment itself costs at
this writing about $3.00 a pound to manufacture, but
no artistic painter should be without this yellow, and
above all it should only be bought from a manufacturer
of excellent reputation.

Cadmium yellow may fail, and in many instances
does fail, because it is improperly made and because
it is ground in an emulsion of oil and water, or be-
cause the oil in which it is ground may be of a highly
acid nature. Manufacturers of tube colors ought to
learn the lesson that no tube color should be ground in
a chemically bleached vegetable oil, for oils are prin-
cipally bleached by means of a strong acid like sul-
phuric or chromic, and all traces of these acids are
not entirely washed out, so that much trouble may
arise from the ultimate effect of this trace of acid,
and even a good color like cadmium may be decom-
posed if the oil be not entirely pure.

The cadmiums are slow but reliable driers and may
be mixed with all other chemical pigments, even flake
white, without decomposing.

Permanent Painting

CALEDONIAN BROWN

Caledonian brown may be a mixture of brown umber
and raw sienna in varying degrees, or it may be a
mixture of vandyke brown and sienna. In the latter
case it would not be permanent. In the former case
it would be, and in all events, no two manufacturers
use the same mixture of pigments nor obtain the
same shades, and as the painter can obtain the shade
he wants by mixtures of these permanent pigments,
there is really no reason why this color should be
added to the already complicated list of painters' tube
colors. It has a tendency to grow darker upon very
long exposure, and when it contains manganese is a
good, hard drier, but when it contains large quanti-
ties of vandyke, it is a soft, slow drier. It is easily
produced on the palette by mixing sienna and umber.

CAPPAH BROWN

Cappah brown is a species of decomposed bog earth
similar in composition to a mixture of vandyke brown
and burnt umber. It is similar to umber on account of
the manganese which it contains, and therefore is a
good drier. It is, however, not very stable in bright
sunlight and darkens somewhat on exposure owing
to its content of bitumen. It can easily be spared from
the list of browns.

Permanent Painting

CARBON BLACK

This is an extremely fine pigment stronger than
lamp black and intensely black, in fact, in blackness
it compares favorably with ivory black. It is per-
manent, and does not affect any other pigment with
which it may be mixed. Its great strength (tinctorial
power) can be shown very easily as follows: if one
takes one part of carbon black and twenty parts of
permanent white and mixes them together, the result
will be a black which will approximate the shade of
lamp black. In other words, it has such intense color-
ing properties that it stains every other color with
which it may be mixed. Although it is absolutely
harmless under all circumstances, it is no better than
ivory black and possesses a number of disadvantages.
It is an extremely poor drier and retards the drying
of every other pigment with which it may be mixed,
so that ivory or bone black should be used in place of it.

CARMINE

Carmine is the coloring matter of the cochineal bug
which is mordanted or fastened by means of alum. It
is an intensely brilliant red, translucent and works
well and dries fairly well, but it is exceedingly fugi-
tive, and is not only bleached by the action of sunlight,
but is destroyed by many of the metallic pigments.
There is no effect that can be produced with carmine
that cannot be produced with the madder lakes, and

Permanent Painting

therefore carmine should never be used on any paint-
er's palette.

CARMINE LAKE

Carmine lake is a deep maroon which is made after
the first coloring matter is extracted from the cochi-
neal bug. It may have a pleasing maroon shade, and
it may have good working qualities, but in six days in
the bright sunlight it shows a loss of brilliancy and
begins to fade. This quality should eliminate it as a
pigment for artistic use. It is decomposed in the pres-
ence of the ochres.

CARNATION LAKE

Prior to 25 years ago this lake was a carmine de-
rivative. Within the last 20 years the author has
found a carmine sold under the name of carnation
lake which was evidently a wood extract and fugitive,
and another sample which was a reduced form of
madder lake. The former was fugitive and useless.
The latter, while not very brilliant, was permanent,
so that, at this writing, it is impossible to say whether
carnation lake, as a general statement, is permanent
or not, for it depends entirely upon the maker. Under
the circumstance it is advisable not to use it for it is
not essential, as the same shade is sold under the name
of scarlet madder.

Permanent Painting

CASSEL EARTH

This pigment may have been in former years an
ochrey brown, but at present it appears to be identical
with vandyke brown, and is not regarded as a per-
manent color. It will be properly described under the
name of vandyke brown.

CERULEAN BLUE

In the present age cerulean blue is an artificial ultra-
marine blue of pale shade known commercially under
the name of artificial cobalt blue. Some manufactur-
ers in order to give it its proper tone grind this pale
commercial ultramarine blue with a mixture of zinc
oxide, and it has the property of appearing blue un-
der gas light or electric light. The author finds that
when made by reputable concerns, it is perfectly per-
manent and can be mixed with almost any pigment ex-
cepting those containing lead. Its existence compli-
cates matters, however, for the ordinary cobalt blue
of commerce mixed with white will produce practically
the same shade and effect.

CHARCOAL GRAY

This pigment appears to be a vine black reduced with
permanent white. When badly washed in its original
manufacture it has a tendency to become hard in the

Permanent Painting

tubes. It can easily be substituted by mixing lamp
black with permanent white, and although it is a per-
manent color and not affected by any other color, it
is a hard drier, owing to its alkaline nature, and if
used on top of a soft drying color like any one of the
lakes, it would show a tendency to crack.

CHINESE BLUE

This is a ferrocyanide of iron sold also under the
name of Prussian blue, milori blue, steel blue, bronze
blue, Antwerp blue and various other names. It dif-
fers from Prussian blue physically only in the fact that
when mixed with white it produces a clear sky-blue
tint. Chemically it is unstable, for, when mixed with
white lead and allowed to remain on the palette over
night it will be blue where it comes in contact with
the air, and decomposes into a pale, sickly green un-
derneath the surface. It does not show this defect
when mixed with permanent white or zinc oxide. If
mixed with one of the charcoal or vine blacks which
contain a slight amount of alkali, it loses its color and
becomes brownish, but when properly made and thor-
oughly washed in its original manufacture and used
alone, it is practically permanent. It may have some
excellent working qualities, and may be a beautiful,
rich color, but all its shades and delicate effects can be
reproduced by means of more permanent blues. There-
fore, there is no reason why this blue should be user!.

Permanent Painting

CHINESE VERMILION

Chinese vermilion is one of the oldest pigments
known to artistic painters. The reader is referred to
the chapter on synopia for a history of the use of this
pigment. Whether the ancient Greeks and Romans
obtained vermilion from China or the Idria section,
it is difficult to say, but the chances are that the Orien-
tal travelers brought some of the native vermilion
with them in addition to that which was found in
Europe.

Vermilion is a sulphide of mercury, and is artificially
made by mixing sulphur and mercury in the presence
of an alkaline solution under heat and pressure. It
ranges in shade from a light orange to a deep scarlet,
and while it is perfectly true that when used alone as
an oil color and exposed to the brilliant sun rays, it
will darken considerably, when glazed over with mad-
der, as is frequently done after it is thoroughly dry,
it is remarkably permanent, or when properly varnished
it is very stable. It is a good drier and has great
opacity.

CHINESE WHITE

Chinese white is a zinc oxide. Its name would imply
that it is a color invented by the Chinese or found
in China, neither of which is the case. It was invented
in France, and probably to hide its origin some manu-

Permanent Painting

facturer called it Chinese white. The description will
be found under the head of zinc white.

CHROME GREEN, LIGHT, MEDIUM AND DARK

These greens are unfortunately named, because al-
though there is some chromium in their composition
from the chromate of lead which they contain, they are
strictly speaking, not pure chrome greens, such as
guignet or viridian green. Chrome greens are essen-
tially a double precipitate of chrome yellow and Prus-
sian blue, and vary in shade according to the percent-
age of yellow or blue which they may contain. These
colors may work very well and dry very well, but
have the combined defects of chrome yellow and Prus-
sian blue. Assuming that the color is properly made,
it is fairly permanent to light, has tremendous tinting
power, but is acted upon by sulphureted hydrogen,
and even when not subjected to the action of any gas,
it loses its brilliancy within a very few years. It is
not recommended as a necessary color and can be very
well omitted.

CHROME ORANGE AND CHROME RED

Both of these colors are chromates of lead made
with the addition of lime and are not any more perma-
nent than the other shades of chrome yellow. In chem-
ical composition they are equal to chrome yellow mixed

Permanent Painting

with a small percentage of red lead or orange mineral.
In view of the fact that cadmium orange exists and
is much more permanent, chrome orange should be
eliminated from the palette.

CHROMIUM OXIDE (See French Veronese Green)

CINNABAR GREEN

The word cinnabar refers entirely to the sulphide of
mercury, and when chrome green was first made, some
manufacturer called his product cinnabar green, in-
tending to convey the idea that his mixture of chrome
yellow and Prussian blue was as permanent as cinnabar
red or native vermilion. The name has stuck to it in the
trade. An examination of the pigments shows that
it is by no means a pure chrome yellow and Prussian
blue, but is reduced with either whiting, permanent
white or other reinforcing pigment, and owing to this
reduction it is more permanent than the concentrated
color, because it does not contain as much pigment
that can spoil or deteriorate as the concentrated color
does. In brilliancy, tone and strength, it is quite sat-
isfactory, but it is not permanent and is easily affected
by noxious gases.

CITRON YELLOW

Citron yellow is also known under the name of
primrose yellow, and is usually composed of a mixture
of chromate and oxide of zinc. Inasmuch as this color

Permanent Painting

is somewhat soluble in water, it cannot be very thor-
oughly washed, and in the presence of moisture has
a marked effect on almost every color with which it
may be mixed. When used alone, it is quite permanent
and not affected by noxious gases of any kind, and
when varnished before it has any opportunity for de-
composition, it is remarkably permanent. In former
years it was regarded as a fugitive color, but this was
due to defects in its manufacture. Now the color has
a fairly large sale for coach painting, but as an artists'
color there is no reason to use it, because the pale
shades of cadmium mixed with permanent white pro-
duce identical effects with no serious results.

COBALT BLUE

This color is very difficult to describe, as it may
be a pale shade of artificial ultramarine blue, or it
may be a true oxide of cobalt, or it may be a salt of
cobalt mixed with alumina and barium. A tube no
larger than your little ringer may sell anywhere from
25 to 40 cents, but that is no indication whatever of
its quality or composition, and the majority of samples
of cobalt blue as sold, that the author has examined,
consist of artificial ultramarine blue, and as such are
among the most permanent and useful pigments which
the artist can possibly use. Owing to the fact that
cobalt and its chemical derivatives are expensive, the
high price still clings to the cobalt blue which the paint-

Permanent Painting

er uses, but this is more or less unwarranted, because
the artificial cobalt blue (ultramarine) is very inex-
pensive and exceedingly permanent, except when
mixed with another pigment which contains lead, like
flake white, white lead, chrome yellow or chrome green.
It should also be kept away from colors containing
copper, lead and iron, and such metallic bases as
are affected by sulphureted hydrogen, for the slight-
est trace of acid will liberate sulphureted hydrogen
from cobalt or ultramarine blue.

On the other hand, it is still possible to buy genu-
ine cobalt blue which is a brilliant blue glaze, finely
powdered. The beautiful blues produced on china
ware by means of vitrification are generally produced
by means of oxide of cobalt, which turns blue at a
very high temperature. When these blue glazes are
finely powdered whether they be brought up in a
medium of glass or of pottery is the same. As such,
these blues have very little hiding power, but are ex-
ceedingly brilliant and strong and unchangeable. They
are used as transparent glazes, but the artificial cobalt
blue made from ultramarine is just as transparent,
and when used alone just as permanent. At the same
time, the minute broken bits of glass of which genuine
cobalt blue is composed refract and reflect the light
with such brilliancy that the optical value of the color
is enhanced.

Cobalt blue is sold under the following names:
smalt, powder blue, Vienna blue, royal blue.

Permanent Painting

COBALT GREEN

Cobalt green is made in various ways. Some manu-
facturers mix a pale shade of ultramarine blue which
is known commercially as artificial ultramarine green
with a mixture of oxide of zinc. Sometimes it is
made by grinding oxide of zinc and zaffer which is a
native oxide of cobalt. In any case the cobalt green
which has been examined is apparently very permanent,
but lacks very much in opacity, which, however, is no
detriment, because the color is principally used as a
glazing color. It appears to be a very expensive color
when made from the salt of genuine cobalt, and as
such is permanent under any and all conditions. It
may also be a composition of genuine cobalt blue
mixed with chromate of zinc or zinc yellow, in which
case it would also be permanent, but if it is a mixture
of ultramarine blue and chromate of zinc, it is not
permanent, and has sometimes been known to decom-
pose in the tube.

It is difficult for the painter to tell what the com-
position of cobalt green may be, but inasmuch as gen-
uine chrome green which is described under the name
of viridian and oxide of chromium is more permanent
and of practically the same shade, the use of cobalt
green may be eliminated.

COBALT VIOLET

This is also a chemical precipitate made with phos-
phate of cobalt, and has evidently been used for nearly

Permanent Painting

a century. It is exceedingly permanent and translu-
cent, but has not the tinctorial power of the purple
madders which easily replace it.

There is a violet ultramarine which is sometimes
sold under the name of cobalt violet. This color is a
beautiful, clear, transparent, permanent color. When
used alone or as a glaze over any other dried color, it
dries slowly.

COLOGNE EARTH

This may be a native vandyke brown tinted with
lamp black, or a native vandyke brown which is cal-
cined so that the organic matter chars and blackens.
It dries somewhat better than vandyke brown, is fair-
ly permanent, but not quite as translucent, and is
analogous to cassel earth and Rubens brown. If
the glazing color which David Teniers, the younger, is
supposed to have used, was cologne earth, we have
no reason to doubt its permanency, and all experiments
made by the author show that it can be freely mixed
with other pigments without producing any decompos-
ing effect.

CONSTANT WHITE

There is no question that this material which is an
artificial sulphate of barium is one of the most useful
pigments for indiscriminate use. It is quite true that
it lacks opacity, and that even when piled on thickly

Permanent Painting

shows a transparency which for many purposes is
detrimental from the artistic and technical standpoint,
but due consideration must be given to the fact that
it is a valuable pigment which can be indiscriminately
mixed with every pigment that is permanent without
producing any harmful effect. For producing a per-
manent glaze, and substituting bitumen, which is easily
decomposed, permanent white can be mixed with any
one of the solid colors, and the same effect produced.
It is not affected by any gases, and when scientifically
prepared, has little or no action on the oil. In other
words, there is no tendency to turn the oil yellow
when placed in the dark. This material is also sold
under the name of blanc fixe, and although some
manufacturers produce a permanent white which is
largely composed of zinc oxide, there are others who
grind the dry blanc fixe in oil, and still others who
mix dry blanc fixe with zinc oxide. There are many
lake colors which are precipitated on this material,
and therefore a quasi lake can always be made by
the painter by taking a small proportion of the solid
pigment and mixing it with a large proportion of
constant white. It dries well and is very reliable.

COPAL MEGILP

When linseed oil is boiled with oxide of lead and
manganese to a temperature of above 500° F., a chem-
ical decomposition takes place, and the metallic com-

Permanent Painting

pounds are dissolved in the linseed oil. Strictly speak-
ing, in the chemical sense, a linseed oil metallic soap
is formed which is frequently used as a drier, and
under some circumstances is reliable, but under others
is not. For instance, as when megilp is mixed with any
one of the blacks, such as lamp black, carbon black,
ivory black, gray black, etc., it hastens their drying,
but should not be used with the colors which natur-
ally dry well. When megilp is mixed with the chemical
colors, a change in shade almost invariably takes
place, and it is an established fact that after megilp
is dry to the touch, it keeps on drying until the re-
sulting film is hard, brittle and contractile.

Where megilp is used indiscriminately, a picture is
almost invariably likely to crack, and even though it
may have some good qualities, its bad qualities so
far outweigh them that it should not be used for
permanent painting.

CORK BLACK

This is a carbon black produced by calcining cork.
It is grayish in color but has extreme strength. It
is a very slow drier, which is characteristic of all
carbons. It is very permanent but has no advantage
over lamp black.

CREMNITZ WHITE, CREMS OR KREMS WHITE

In all respects this white is similar in chemical com-
position to flake white or white lead. It is chemically

Permanent Painting

produced by what is known as the "quick process,"
and is made directly from a solution of acetate of lead.
It is exceedingly heavy, but crystalline in structure,
and very easily affected by sulphureted hydrogen. It
should not be used in painting portraits because zinc
white is far more permanent. However, it has one
good feature and is useful for one purpose. In pre-
paring a canvas cremnitz white mixed with turpentine
produces a flat ground which has what the painter calls
"tooth." The surface has a fine grain, to which sub-
sequent colors adhere well, and as such its use is per-
missible.

CRIMSON LAKE

This is a beautiful shade of cochineal lake, and is
manufactured from the coloring matter which remains
after the carmine has been precipitated or extracted
from the cochineal bug. It is, however, a useless color.
It not only dries badly, but when submitted to the
sunlight for 10 days, it bleaches badly. It should
never be used under any circumstances for permanent
painting, and is similar to carmine lake.

CRIMSON MADDER

This is a form of madder lake manufactured very
largely from alizarin, which is chemically the same
as the madder produced from the root. It is very
permanent as long as it is used alone or when used

Permanent Painting

as a glaze over a thoroughly dry surface, but when
mixed with any one of the chemical colors, or the na-
tive earth colors, it decomposes rapidly, and therefore
should not be used indiscriminately. It dries slowly.

DAVEY'S GRAY

Davey's gray is a permanent color which is prepared
from a silicious earth, either clay or slate, tinted with
artificial cobalt. It is not used in America to any great
extent, because it is assumed that the color may be
produced by a mixture of constant white, lamp black
and cobalt blue. It is permanent and has no effect on
other colors, but is affected by sulphureted hydrogen,
or when made with artificial ultramarine blue decom-
poses lead colors.

DEEP MADDER

This is a permanent glazing color when used alone
or when glazed over other colors which are dry. In
shade it approaches carmine lake and should be used m
the place of carmine lake. It dries very slowly, but
can be generally recommended as a safe pigment. Must
not be mixed with ochre, lead or native earth pigments.

EMERALD GREEN

There is apparently no green which is as brilliant as
emerald green. It is also known under the name of

Permanent Painting

Paris green or emeraude green. It is a peculiarly crys-
talline color, and when ground exceedingly fine loses
its brilliancy. Some samples contain green aniline,
which is added for the purpose of giving it staining
power, because emerald green of itself is a defective
and exceedingly weak color. Being a compound of
arsenic and copper, it is very easily decomposed by
sulphur gases, although it is fairly permanent to light.
It is one of the fugitive colors for whose existence there
may be some excuse, because it is exceedingly bril-
liant, and when used with extreme care and varnished
over as soon as it is thoroughly dry, there is no rea-
son why it should not last 50 or 100 years.

Marine painters use it for painting the starboard
light, and sometimes produce a most brilliant effect by
starting with a hydrated oxide of chromium, then
painting a ring of emerald green, and in the center
placing a touch of zinc white. This gives the effect
of luminosity.

Emerald green dries slowly and should always be
used alone. It sometimes destroys lake colors in a
few hours.

EXTRACT OF VERMILION

This is a misnomer, for there is no such thing as
an extract of vermilion. The color is generally a very
pale vermilion of scarlet shade, and the description
under the head of Chinese and English vermilion anT
swers the description of extract of vermilion.

Permanent Painting

FIELD'S ORANGE VERMILION

This color is composed of the sulphide of mercury,
the same as extract of vermilion, Chinese vermilion,
etc., and differs only in shade, being somewhat deeper
than cadmium orange or orange chrome yellow. It is
regarded as permanent when used alone and is a fairly
good drier.

FLAKE WHITE

The Dutch were the first to manufacture white lead,
by what is known as the Dutch process, which con-
sisted in submitting sheets of lead to the heat of de-
composing manure and the vapors of vinegar. They
found that the metallic lead was decomposed after 3
or 4 months, and flakes of white replaced the metallic
lead. The Dutch called this pigment scheel white,
which means scale or flake, and when we use the term
"flake white" we always refer to white lead.

There is no question that flake white has certain
defects, its principal one being that it is affected by
sulphur gases. Another defect, which it has in con-
junction with many other pigments, is its tendency
to turn a painting yellow. Much of the yellowness
of age is due to the decomposition which takes place
between flake white and the oil or varnish used as
a medium.

At the same time, there are many pictures which are

Permanent Painting

hundreds of years old in which the flake white has
been rejuvenated even after it has turned brown or
yellow through the effect of gases. From a mechanical
standpoint flake white is an unctious paint which
works very well under the artist's brush, and when
properly dry and glazed over with zinc, cannot be
considered as fugitive or easily decomposed. It has
the advantage over zinc, that it does not dry continu-
ously, nor does it become' exceedingly brittle with age,
but zinc has so far replaced it that there is really no
reason why it should be promiscuously used.

FRENCH BLUE

This is an artificial ultramarine blue which is abso-
luely permanent to light, dries fairly well, and can
either be used as a glaze or as a solid color. It must
never be mixed with flake white, chrome yellow,
chrome green, emerald green, or any pigment contain-
ing a metallic base, excepting zinc. When mixed with
zinc, any re-action that may take place is not visible
or apparent, and for this reason is one of the most
remarkable colors that we have. It is identical in
composition with the genuine lapis lazuli or natural
ultramarine blue, and the author cannot find that it
is inferior in any respects to the natural stone.

It contains a large amount of sulphur, which is
very easily liberated in the presence of an acid, and
in view of the fact that there is free acid in the at-
mosphere in any city, it is well to bear in mind that

Permanent Painting

this pigment should never be mixed with any other
pigment which the free sulphurous acid is likely to
decompose. In the chapter on drying oils evidence
will be adduced which will demonstrate that decompo-
sition can take place only in the presence of water
or moisture, so that the decomposition of ultramarine
blue by acid with flake white can be prevented.

FRENCH ULTRAMARINE

The same as French blue or artificial ultramarine
blue. It was first made in France but to-day Germany
and the United States are the largest producers of
ultramarine blue. When used alone or when mixed
with zinc white it is absolutely permanent. There are
no less than twenty shades of French ultramarine rang-
ing from the palest cobalt to the deepest ultramarine.
Other varieties are also made, such as green, violet,
purple and red, which will be described in their proper
places.

FRENCH VERMILION

The same as Chinese or English vermilion.

FRENCH VERONESE GREEN

French Veronese green is now a permanent pig-
ment which does not possess very much opacity, but

Permanent Painting

can be readily mixed with any other pigment without
any injurious effects. There is a story extant that
Paul Veronese was the discoverer or inventor of this
color, but it is doubtful whether this is true, in view
of the fact that the production of hydrated oxide of
chromium was evidently not known during the time
that he lived. The true Veronese green named for
him was more likely a clay colored with hydrated ox-
ide of iron known to this day under the name of terre
verte or green earth, although from the evidence which
we have at hand, terre verte was used long before
Paul Veronese was born.

Veronese green is similar to the genuine chrome
green, of which there are two kinds, the solid or
opaque kind, known under the name of chromium
oxide, and the transparent kind, known under the
name of viridian. Viridian is sometimes known un-
der the name of guignet green, but it is generally
believed that guignet green is the oxide of chromium
and not the hydrated oxide.

It must be borne in mind that the hydrated oxide
is a transparent color similar to a lake, and the ox-
ide of chromium is an opaque pigment with intense
hiding power. Both the oxide and the hydrated oxide
are very permanent under any and all conditions, and
can be mixed with other pigments with the excep-
tion that the hydrated oxide and madder lake show
some slight decomposition, but as has been properly
pointed out, there is seldom, if any, opportunity, where

Permanent Painting

madder lake must be mixed with oxide of chromium
to produce any given shade.

Veronese green is a good drier and a reliable color.

FOUNDATION WHITE

This is the ordinary white lead of commerce which
is generally a very pure article, and is identical with
that which the house painter uses. As such, it is not
by any means the best foundation white, and cannot
compare with a mixture of zinc oxide and white lead.
For foundation purposes, such a mixture dries very
well, and produces a surface which is neither too
hard nor too soft, and after it has dried sufficiently
hard, presents a surface to which other pigments ad-
here very well. Such a surface has what is technically
known as "tooth," so that when we speak of a pig-
ment having "tooth," we refer to a physical surface
to which other colors adhere properly.

Foundation white may be made by the painter of a
mixture of ordinary house painters' pigments, such as
zinc white and white lead ground in linseed oil. It
should be thinned only with turpentine so as to dry
with a gloss. A little picture varnish (mastic dis-
solved in turpentine or damar varnish) may be mixed
to give elasticity but as these varnishes become brittle
in time, fat oil (a fatty linseed oil) is preferable and
a small quantity in foundation white is to be recom-
mended.

Permanent Painting

GALL STONE OR EXTRACT OF GALL

This is a true organic color with which the bile
of the gall bladder is strongly tinted. When this
bile is combined with lime and magnesia, it forms small
nodules known as gall stones. It has its origin dur-
ing the time when the ancients used almost any ma-
terial which had tinctorial power, but as it possesses
no particular merit and is exceedingly fugitive, it is
not to be recommended for painting.

GAMBOGE

Gamboge is a semi-soluble resin which is obtained
from a particular tree in India, Ceylon and Siam. It
is a coloring matter which has many of the character-
istics of the yellow coloring matter in linseed oil, in
fact, a chemical examination of it indicates that it is
analogous to xantophyll and is not as fugitive as
the yellow coloring matter obtained from turmeric,
Persian berry, etc. We find it on the market in com-
bination with alumina as a base, and as it has no
hiding power whatever, it must be regarded as a stain
or a true lake, for it is quite transparent. It is seldom
sold in its pure state, and as an oil color, the dye which
gamboge contains is mordanted on alumina as a base.
It bleaches somewhat when exposed to strong sun-
light but recovers its color again when placed in the
dark, which is characteristic of the coloring matter
of many of the vegetable oils. It is of a true resinous

Permanent Painting

nature, and therefore acts like a varnish gum, for it
dries with a considerable gloss. It is not very stable,
and while it may dry fairly well by itself, it acts sim-
ilar to bitumen, retarding the drying of other colors.
It is therefore not to be generally recommended.

GERANIUM LAKE

It is very unfortunate that in the early 70^5 when
the dye known as cosine was invented, many brilliant
lakes were made for the painter, which exceeded in
strength and effectivenss any coloring matter that had
been known before that time. There are two shades of
geranium, the bluish and the yellowish, both of them
exceedingly brilliant, some of which are precipitated
on alumina and some on minium or red lead. In any
case, geranium lake is so fugitive when made of cosine,
that in 24 hours it begins to bleach, and many a painter
has had his work completely destroyed by the use of
pigments of this class. It is unfortunate that these col-
ors were ever sold to painters. They should under
no circumstances be used. The madder lakes easily
replace geranium lake and should be used instead.

GERANIUM MADDER

When this pigment is made of a very bright form of
madder it is safe to use it as a glazing color, as it is
perfectly permanent. It is like all the madders which

Permanent Painting

are easier to use as glazes than in mixtures with any
pigments which may have an ultimate effect, that is,
the color will change in time. It dries very slowly and
must not be mixed with ochre, raw sienna or flake
white.

GOLD OCHRE OR GOLDEN OCHRE

Ordinarily this pigment is French ochre toned with
chrome yellow, and the painter should not use it, for
it is far preferable to use ordinary ochre, toning it, if
necessary, with cadmium yellow. All the ochres have
a slight tendency to darken upon exposure. They
must not be mixed with any of the lake colors, but
when mixed with any of the mineral colors are prac-
tically permanent. Ochres all dry very well and when
once dry are permanent.

GREEN LAKE

This pigment is prepared in various ways, and is
generally conceded to be a fugitive color which has
little or no value. When made of an aniline dye
precipitated on alumina it will fade within a week, but
when made of zinc yellow and Prussian blue diluted
with alumina, it will retain its brilliancy for many
years. There is another variety on the market which
is made of Dutch pink or quercitron bark extract and
Prussian blue, which is not as permanent as that made
from zinc yellow. The color is not to be recommended.

Permanent Painting

HARRISON RED

This is a new pigment of the aniline series which is
exceedingly brilliant and probably ten times as strong
as quick silver vermilion. In shade it approximates
a mixture of light and dark English vermilion, but in
tinctorial power it is remarkably strong. It is much
more permanent to light than vermilion, and like ver-
milion it has a tendency to darken and not to fade.

Its composition is similar to a proprietary red known
as helio fast red, and is made by one of the large ani-
line manufacturers in Germany and they probably
named it in honor of the American artist, Birge Har-
rison.

This pigment possesses some analogies to the parani-
traniline colors, but has the advantage of not bleed-
ing. In other words, after it is dry, and when white
is painted over it the red does not bleed through
and turn the white into a brown as is the case with
para reds.

Harrison red may be said to be permanent when
thoroughly diluted with alumina lake and white ; it
does show slight traces of decomposition after three
months' exposure to the sun, but not sufficient to
condemn it, and it may be said that the only disad-
vantage concerning this color, known at present, is
its inability to dry. When Harrison red is mixed with
oil it sometimes remains absolutely moist and smeary
for six or seven weeks, which, of course, is a serious

Permanent Painting

disadvantage. At the same time the addition of a
drier or a drying oil changes the brilliancy of its
shade, so that it might be well in the use of this color
to reduce it only with turpentine and then expose it to
the light. It mixes well with madder lake without
showing very much decomposition.

HOOKER'S GREEN

This pigment is similar to the green lakes just de-
scribed, with the exception that it has some hiding
power. Some manufacturers, in order to make it more
permanent, use a mixture of orange chrome yellow,
Prussian blue and alumina, which is not as brilliant as
the pigment made from yellow lake or gamboge, but
it is much more permanent.

One sample examined by the author appeared to
be a mixture of Prussian blue and raw sienna. Such
a mixture is permanent and dries well.

INDIAN BLUE (Sec also Indigo)

This color is obtained from the leaves of certain
plants which are found principally in India. Within
the last few years it has been made the subject of
research, as in the case of madder, so that it is now
manufactured artificially from coal tar. The pigment
present in artificial indigo is identical with that in the
natural, but the artificial color is purer. In its over-

Permanent Painting

tone it is similar to Prussian blue, but is much weaker,
and somewhat transparent, having all of the character-
istics of a lake color. It dries poorly, and when a
manganese or lead drier is added to it it is quickly
decomposed. When it is exposed to the sunlight it
fades rapidly. It is, therefore, useless for artistic
painting.

INDIAN LAKE

Indian lake is a deep red lake which is assumed to
be the lake that exudes from the tree from which
gum shellac is recovered, and is one of the lakes which
was probably used by Sir Joshua Reynolds, which tend-
ed to destroy his pictures to such a great extent. In per-
manency it is better than carmine, and not by any
means as good as madder, and like all organic lakes
is quickly decomposed when mixed with some of
the iron oxide colors. It is fugitive and unreliable,
dries very badly and should not be used.

INDIAN PURPLE

Indian purple is a complex mixture originally made
by taking a weak form of Prussian blue and mixing it
with vermilion. As such, it was very deep toned and
muddy, but was fairly permanent. Later on, carmine
was added to this mixture, but it was found that, al-
though the brilliancy of the colors was enhanced, it

Permanent Painting

was less permanent than before. Nowadays it is
made by coloring or mixing ultramarine blue with'
madder lake, during the process of manufacture of
the madder, and is regarded as a fairly permanent
color. It can be readily duplicated on the palette.

INDIAN RED

This is a true oxide of iron which contains no water
in its combination, is extremely permanent, and can
be generally recommended when it is unsophisticated.
Unfortunately a number of manufacturers of artist
tube colors spoil this good and permanent color by
adding a lake in order to enhance its brilliancy, and
in doing so destroy the permanent value of the pig-
ment. The name Indian red is supposed to have or-
iginated from two sources; the first, because a native
form of hematite or red oxide of iron which contains
silica was found, and is still found, in the Orient, par-
ticularly in Persia, and, in the second place, from the
further fact that the North American Indians used the
native red ochre or hematite as a wash for the wig-
wams, and as a coloring matter for personal decora-
tion. In either case, the colors chemically are the
same and are bright red oxides of iron. Much of the
Indian red, however, which is used by color makers,
is artificially prepared by burning copperas (sulphate
of iron), until the acid is entirely driven off, and
only the oxide remains. When this is washed it forms

Permanent Painting

a bright red, solid color which can be mixed with
nearly every other permanent pigment, and may be
regarded as fairly permanent, with one or two excep-
tions. Upon long and extreme exposure the bright
Indian red loses its brilliancy and turns darker, which
is due to the chemical change or decomposition from
the ferric to the ferrous state. The ferrous oxide of
iron is a black oxide with which the artistic painter is
not acquainted. The ferric oxide of iron is the bright,
red oxide. The darkening effect of Indian red is due
to the slight change from the ferric to the ferrous
oxide. The same is true when Indian red is mixed
with zinc oxide to produce a flesh tint. The author
exposed a sample so made for three years to the bright
daylight, and at the end of three years a very slight
darkening effect had taken place, but inasmuch as
artistic paintings are rarely, if ever, exposed to the
bright sunshine throughout the entire year, Indian red
must be regarded as one of the permanent and reliable
pigments.

Indian red dries very well and has enormous hid-
ing power (opacity). When mixed with zinc oxide
to produce a ground for flesh tints it is very reliable.
There are many shades of Indian red. Some produce
a violet when mixed with white and others a dis-
tinct pink or rouge. All are permanent when pure.
When Indian red is toned with madder lake it is
frequently called tuscan red or Pompeian red. Indian
red does not decompose madder lake.

Permanent Painting

INDIAN YELLOW

This color is similar in many of its characteristics
to gall stone yellow, and inasmuch as it is made from
the excrement of camels, its coloring matter is same-
what similar to the biliary coloring matter, and while
it is brilliant and transparent, it is just as fugitive as
gall stone yellow, and is not to be recommended. It
dries badly.

INDIGO

This is a color extracted from the indigo plant which
grows in the East Indies, and has been in use for many
centuries. It is used both as an oil color and a water
color but possesses no particular advantage. As an
oil color indigo dries very slowly, fades when exposed
to light, is destroyed or reduced when mixed with
chrome yellow, white lead and the majority of metallic
paints. It can be safely substituted by a mixture of
Prussian blue and lamp black, or better still, by a mix-
ture of Antwerp blue and lamp black, Antwerp blue
being a reduced form of Prussian blue. It is of doubt-
ful value, and it is a question whether any of the old
painters used it to any great extent. While it is ac-
cepted that it makes a very desirable green when mixed
with raw sienna or a yellow lake, it is not as good as
a mixture of Prussian blue and raw sienna, and as yel •
low lake in almost any form is fugitive the resulting
color is not to be recommended.

Indigo should therefore be excluded from the palette.

Permanent Painting

ITALIAN PINK

This is the same as Dutch pink or yellow lake, its
name is a misnomer, because it is a transparent olive
yellow, and not a paint. It is quite fugitive. It dries
very poorly and should not be used.

IVORY BLACK

Ivory black is prepared from charred ivory, and
contains only about 20% of carbon black, the balance
of it being phosphate of lime or bone material, but it
is unlike any other black, on account of its intensity.
In fact, it is so black by comparison, that on an ivory
black ground a stripe of lamp black is distinctly dis-
cernible, or visa versa, a stripe of ivory black will make
a black mark on lamp black. It is perfectly perma-
nent and dries very well, and can be mixed indiscrim-
inately with any other permanent color.

JAUNE BRILLIANT

This is also known under the name of bulliant yel-
low, its name being a translation from the French.
It is made in two ways, the one producing a permanent
and the other an unreliable pigment. The permanent
brilliant yellow is made of zinc yellow mixed with
zinc oxide to give it hiding power, and is a brilliant,
permanent color. By the other method one part chem-

Permanent Painting

ically pure lemon chrome yellow is mixed with twenty
parts of white lead. The latter is stronger and has
more hiding power than the former, but is easily af-
fected by sulphureted hydrogen, and is not as perma-
nent as the zinc yellow. It dries very well and should
be used alone.

JACQUEMINOT MADDER

This is merely a bluish shade of madder, very strong,
brilliant and permanent, and ranks with all the other
madder lakes. It dries very slowly and for flower
painting is absolutely permanent when used as a glaze
over a dry ground. It is frequently mixed with ivory
black to produce a brown lake.

KING'S YELLOW

This is prepared in several ways. Some manufac-
turers make it similar to the formulas of brilliant yel-
low just described. Others mix chrome yellow and flake
white. Formerly, it was made by grinding the mineral
orpiment, which is a sulphide of arsenic, and has been
used as a pigment for several thousand years. When
used absolutely alone, it has some qualities which may
'recommend it, but it is almost impossible to use a pig-
ment of this kind alone, for the mere addition of a
small amount of drier is sufficient to destroy the
brilliancy of orpiment, hence manufacturers have been

Permanent Painting

led to make it by using zinc yellow or chrome yellow
as a base. In any case, orpiment is useless and not to
be recommended, as King's yellow has all the charac-
teristics of brilliant yellow with which it is analogous.

LAMP BLACK

This pigment is now made by condensing the smoke
of various burning coal tar oils. It is almost a pure
form of carbon, is intensely strong, and differs from
carbon black and ivory black in that it produces a dis-
tinctly bluish gray shade when mixed with white. It
is a very bad drier, and remains very flexible for a
long time. Therefore, f^is always advisable, when a
gray is to be made, that zinc oxide and lamp black
be used, because the flexibility of lamp black overcomes
the brittleness of zinc. Lamp black can be mixed with
any other pigment. It is not chemically acted upon, nor
is it acted upon by light. It can be mixed with any
pigment and is absolutely inert. When it refuses to
dry it may be exposed to the sunlight and fresh air,
which hastens the drying very considerably. Lamp
black, however, may be mixed with drier without any
harm, but sunlight and air are more reliable.

LEITCH'S BLUE

This is similar in some respects to artificial ultra-
marine blue, but not as permanent. It is made by

Permanent Painting

mixing artificial ultramarine blue and Prussian blue.
An old variety was made by mixing genuine cobalt
blue and Prussian blue. In either case it bleaches
slightly, and is not as reliable as either cobalt blue
or ultramarine alone. It dries better than ultramarine
and can be produced on the palette. It has a tendency
to turn slightly greenish in the dark but revives on
exposure to light.

LEMON YELLOW

This may be either chromate of barium or a chro-
mate of strontium, and has many of the characteristics
of a brilliant yellow lake, and at the same time is much
more permanent than any organic color. It can be
mixed with almost every color, excepting those con-
taining hydrated oxide of iron, such as siennas or
ochres, and where a yellow lake is desired of excep-
tional brilliancy, a mixture of constant white and
lemon yellow produces very desirable results. It is
similar in many respects to chromate of zinc, and may
be regarded as a reliable, permanent color. It cannot
supplant zinc yellow and may therefore be omitted.

LIGHT RED

The author finds that some of the light reds on the
market are evidently brilliant shades of Indian red,
and almost pure oxide of iron. Others are mixtures

Permanent Painting

of burnt sienna and oxide of iron, and still others are
forms of burnt ochre, which are oxides of iron and
clay. In any case, any one of these three colors are
perfectly permanent and reliable, and the description
for Indian red would hold good for light red. All
of the light reds are good driers, and we find that from
the earliest days of decoration as practiced by the
Egyptians down to the present day, light red has been
used by all painters. When mixed with zinc white
or flake white the tendency for light red is to darken
slightly and become brownish, but this is not percepti-
ble for many years, and only occurs upon extreme ex-
posure. It is a very reliable pigment.

MADDER CARMINE, MADDER CARMINE
EXTRA AND MADDER LAKE

These are lakes prepared from the madder root that
differ somewhat as to shade and brilliancy. They are
all similar in composition to the alizarins, and are all
permanent, except when mixed with the ochre and
sienna pigments, white lead, chrome yellow, chrome
green and metallic pigments of that nature. The mad-
der lakes should only be used as glazes, and can very
safely be mixed with constant white to produce bril-
liant and more roseate shades. They all dry slowly
and when they "sadden" they can be revived by plac-
ing .them in the sunlight for a few hours.

Permanent Painting

MAGENTA

Magenta is one of the newer, aniline pigments,
precipitated on an alumina base, and while extremely
brilliant when freshly applied, has absolutely no value
whatever as an artistic color. In one week, magenta
bleaches perceptibly, and is very easily affected by any
of the inorganic pigments. It is not to be recom-
mended and should not be used.

MALACHITE GREEN: ALSO KNOWN UNDER
THE NAME OF MOUNTAIN GREEN

This pigment was known to the Grecians, and is also
a semi-precious jewel. It is sometimes found in huge
slabs and used in the making of table tops, pedestals
and other articles of ornament. It is a brilliant miner-
al green streaked with a light green, and is a hy-
drated carbonate of copper. Whether made artifi-
cially, or prepared from the green mineral, it has the
serious defect that it is affected by sulphur gases, and
may either bleach or darken according to the nature
of the gas which attacks it, but when properly var-
nished and used alone, it is quite permanent. In view
of the fact that there are other greens which are ab-
solutely permanent, and from which similar shades
may be prepared, there is no necessity for the use
of malachite green.

This pigment dries well and has been used for over
three thousand years. It was well known to the an-
cient Egyptians.

Permanent Painting

MARS COLORS
BROWN, ORANGE, RED, VIOLET AND YELLOW

MARS BROWN

This is a natural color, unburnt, and similar in
composition to raw umber. It is a very good drier,
but must not be mixed with any of the lakes. Of it-
self, it is a perfectly permanent pigment.

MARS ORANGE

This has sometimes been called extract of burnt
sienna, because it is composed entirely of hydrated
oxide of iron which has been properly precipitated and
washed. It is very uniform in composition, and identi-
cal with ordinary iron rust. It has generally been re-
garded as a perfectly safe and permanent pigment, but
this is not a fact. It attacks not only every lake
with which it may be mixed, but is such a hard drier
that it has a tendency to crack. It makes most beau-
tiful, clear yellowish tints when mixed with zinc
white, and when diluted with constant white, it has
every characteristic of a lake, but owing to its chem-
ical composition, it darkens upon extreme exposure,
and the beautiful clear tones which it produces when
mixed with white have a tendency to sadden upon
exposure.

Permanent Painting

MARS RED

This is similar in all respects to mars orange, with
the exception that it has been heated until the water
of combination is driven off, and while it is identical
with light red, it is much more transparent. It is a
soft, permanent color, and although it is supposed to
affect a number of lakes, it is very doubtful whether
it does, but in order to practice precaution, it may be
wise not to mix it with several of the lakes, but to
use the lakes over it as a glazing color. It dries well,
and is permanent.

MARS VIOLET

Mars violet is a very dark form of crocus martis, or
Indian red. It is similar to the color known as caput
mortum, and is nothing more nor less than a purple
oxide of iron. It has a distinctly bluish shade, is very
durable, dries well and is permanent to light.

MARS YELLOW

Mars yellow has also been called extract of ochre,
or extract of raw sienna, because it is composed of
the coloring matter of these two pigments. It fre-
quently cannot be distinguished from a good quality
of raw sienna, is permanent, dries well and is trans-
lucent. It has been suggested frequently that mars
yellow, or a good form of raw sienna should be used

Permanent Painting

as a substitute for the yellow lakes, and this can easily
be done when these colors are mixed with constant
white. As a glazing color, it is permanent, but, like
all of the oxides of iron which contain water in combi-
nation, it must not be mixed with an organic color
such as any one of the lakes.

MAUVE AND MAUVE LAKE

This is a most undesirable though brilliant color,
which begins to deteriorate almost the same day that
it is applied. It is made from one of the fugitive
aniline dyes, but could be made from permanent dyes,
although there is no sample on the market which the
author has examined that is fit for the artist's palette.
In these modern days mauve lake should be replaced
by a permanent mauve which would not be difficult to
produce, and which would be as permanent as madder,
but such a pigment does not exist, to the best of the
author's knowledge.

MEGILP (Sec Copal Megilp)

MINERAL GRAY

This is a nondescript color which is made from a
solid gray or gang rock, and tinted with the blue ot
lapis lazuli. It has very little strength or tinctorial
power. Its principal characteristic is its high price.
It can very easily be imitated by a mixture of cheaper

Permanent Painting

colors which would be just as permanent. It has,
however, no defects. It dries well, is permanent to
light, and permanent when mixed with every pigment
excepting those containing lead, which it does not
affect as quickly as ultramarine blue, because its sul-
phur content is so extremely low. Zinc white, lamp
black and a trace of ultramarine produce the same
shade.

MINIUM

Minium is a very brilliant orange red. It is a
pure form of oxide of lead made by calcining flake
white. Its shade is similar to that of orange vermilion.
It is perfectly permanent to light, but is very suscepti-
ble to the action of sulphureted hydrogen. It has the
same shade as scarlet quick silver vermilion, and is a
powerful drier. It is best to use it alone and it ought
to be varnished as soon as possible. When not var-
nished it bleaches to a straw color on long exposure,
which is due to the acid gases in the air.

MONO CHROME TINTS

These are mixtures of white lead, raw umber, burnt
umber, lamp black, ivory black, etc., and on account
of the lead content are affected by sulphureted hy-
drogen, which tends to darken them. When these
colors are made on a zinc white base they are much

Permanent Painting

more permanent, in fact, may be regarded as perfectly
permanent. They dry well and can be reproduced on
the palette.

MUMMY

Mummy is a form of bitumen or asphaltum used
as a glazing color. It was supposed to be permanent,
because the bitumen or asphaltum which is found in
the mummy cases was assumed to be permanent, be-
cause it was so old, and had not undergone any change
in its drying condition ; but when used as an oil color,
it is treacherous, and should not be used for the same
reason that no asphaltum or bitumen should be used.
It retards the drying of an otherwise good color, and
is to be condemned from every point of view.

NAPLES YELLOW

The old Naples yellow was a mixture of litharge,
or oxide of lead and sulphide of antimony, a most un-
stable color which frequently decomposed itself, but
for many years color manufacturers have imitated it
by mixing cadmium, yellow, ochre and white, and some
manufacturers produce better and more permanent
Naples yellow than others. This is due to the fact
that this pigment may be a mixture of deep orange cad-
mium and zinc white, in which case it is exceedingly
permanent, but where the zinc white is replaced by

Permanent Painting

white lead or flake white, it is easily affected by sul-
phureted hydrogen. Except for convenience there is
no necessity for having this as a separate color, for
the painter can mix up any shade of Naples yellow
to suit himself.

NAPLES YELLOW REDDISH

Naples yellow reddish is the same as any Naples yel-
low, except that the orange form of cadmium has
been used, or a slight tinge or oxide of iron added to
the zinc white. Either form of imitation Naples yel-
low is superior to the natural and is practically per-
manent, which cannot be said of the genuine.

NEUTRAL TINT

This is a complex mixture of ultramarine, sienna,
lamp black or ochre and lamp black, and under all
circumstances is an excellent color which is perfectly
permanent. It can be reproduced on the palette and is
bought only for convenience. It dries well.

NEUTRAL ORANGE

Neutral orange is a permanent color also of a com-
plex mixture. It has many of the characteristics of
mars orange, but sometimes is made by mixing a bril-
liant yellow, free from lead, with a bright oxide of
iron. When made from cadmium yellow, it is quite

Permanent Painting

expensive, but when made from zinc yellow or barium
yellow, it is not quite as strong in hiding power, but
is very desirable. The color dries well.

NEW BLUE

New blue is an artificial ultramarine blue of the
cobalt shade, perfectly permanent, excepting when
mixed with white lead or flake white, or any other
color containing lead. It must not be used in con-
junction with a lead drier. By itself it is absolutely
permanent and dries well.

NOTTINGHAM WHITE

This is a form of white lead or flake white, which
is described under the heading of flake white.

OLIVE GREEN

Olive green is a beautiful pigment, composed of a
mixture of yellow lake and Prussian blue. It is not
permanent and should not be used, for it dries badly
and fades.

Olive green may be made of raw sienna and Prus-
sian blue, in which case it dries well and is absolutely
permanent, and when mixed with constant white
(blanc fixe) or diluted with blanc de lacque (alumina
hydrate) produces a lake of any degree of transpar-
ency.

Permanent Painting

Olive green or olive green lake must not be mixed
with any other lake.

OLIVE LAKE

Olive lake is a mixture of ultramarine blue and yel-
low lake which fades and is unreliable. The mixture
described under the paragraph on olive green is to be
recommended in its place.

OLIVE MADDER

Olive madder is a misnomer, there being no true
madder lake which is green, but a mixture of ultra-
marine blue and certain forms of raw sienna or Prus-
sian blue and sienna produce an olive green which
is exceedingly permanent, and, although somewhat
muddy, can be very safely used, except in the presence
of lead pigments. It is a very good drier.

ORANGE MINERAL (See Minium)
ORANGE VERMILION (See Vermilion)

ORANGE MADDER

A scarlet madder mixed with an aniline yellow or a
yellow lake like Dutch pink or Italian yellow. This is
a most undesirable pigment which remains wet for
weeks and in the end, fades. There is, however, no

Permanent Painting

reason why a lake color of an orange shade cannot be
made from the para yellows or para reds, but the au-
thor has not found any on the market.

ORIENT MADDER

Orient madder is a deep variety of cadmium yellow,
and has all the permanent characteristics of the cad-
mium series of colors. It is diluted with blanc de
laque (alumina hydrate) and has almost as much trans-
lucency as a true lake, but dries very slowly.

ORPIMENT

Orpiment is the same as King's yellow, and was
originally a sulphide of arsenic. Some samples of
orpiment still found on the market are the arsenic
color, and as such are not recommended. The same
shade may be produced by mixing various yellows
and whites. The true orpiment is not to be recom-
mended.

OXIDE OF CHROMIUM (See French Veronese Green)

OXIDE OF CHROMIUM, TRANSPARENT
(See French Veronese Green)

OXFORD OCHRE

This is a muddy grade of ochre found in England,
very permanent, and containing more oxide of iron

Permanent Painting

than the French ochre. It is sometimes used as a base
for red pigments, and that is done when the ochre
is heated to a red heat so that all the water of combi-
nation is driven off, and the hydrated iron is changed
into a true oxide. It is perfectly permanent, except
when mixed with the lakes. When burnt and sold
under the name of burnt ochre, it is similar to some
of the shades of mars orange.

PAYNE'S GRAY

Payne's gray is a mixture of black, ochre and blue,
and is permanent if the blue used is ultramarine. The
water color Payne's gray is a different mixture which
is not permanent. It dries slowly.

PERMANENT BLUE (See Ultramarine Blue)
PERMANENT GREEN (See Viridian)

PERMANENT VIOLET

This may be a mineral color composed of phosphate
of manganese, and when so prepared is not permanent
by any means, and does not deserve the name, or it
may be a mixture of cobalt blue and madder lake
which is more permanent, but the painter is referred
to other violets which can be made from permanent
pigments, and should be used in place of the so-called
permanent violets.

Permanent Painting

Violet ultramarine is the most reliable of the violets
but should not be mixed with any color excepting, per-
haps, constant white (blanc fixe) and zinc white. It
is as transparent as a lake, and remains brilliant even in
the bright sunlight.

PERMANENT WHITE

This is a pure zinc oxide described under the chap-
ter on zinc white, dries slowly and is permanent.

PERMANENT YELLOW

This is a mixture of chromate of barium and zinc
white, or chromate of zinc and zinc white. The color
is rather weak, but can be safely used with chromium
oxide or the viridian colors, and is not affected by
sulphur gases or light. Generally it is a very safe col-
or to use, but dries rather slowly. It is also known
as canary yellow.

i
PINK MADDER

This is a weak variety of madder lake made from
alizarin or madder root. It is permanent and safe to
use when not mixed with ochre, lead, or any one of
the chemical pigments. When used as a glaze over a
perfectly dry surface, it is quite permanent, although
bright sunlight bleaches it to a very slight extent

Permanent Painting

after the lapse of two years. It is a bad drier, but
under no circumstances must it be mixed with a drying
oil, because all the drying oils contain metallic sub-
stances in solution which act deleteriously on all of
the madders. The best way to dry pink madder or any
madder lake is to use well settled, old, raw linseed oil,
and then expose the picture to the bright light, for the
sun will dry madder lake without decomposing it. As
this color is largely used as a glaze it is the frequent
cause of cracks.

PRIMROSE AUREOLIN (See Aureolin)

PRIMROSE YELLOW

This is a pale variety of chromate of zinc, or it may
be a mixture of chromate of zinc and chromate of
barium, or it may be composed of chromate of zinc
and oxide of zinc. In any one of these cases, it is
a safe, permanent, reliable color. It dries fairly well,
particularly when exposed to light. It is not affected
by sulphur gases but cannot be mixed with a lake
color.

PRUSSIAN BLUE

Prussian blue is a chemical compound which is made
from the cyanogen obtained from certain organic sub-
stances such as leather, horn, feathers, etc. There

Permanent Painting

is a great variety of colors made in this manner, all
of which are ferro-cyanides of iron. They are called
steel blue, Chinese blue, Milori blue, bronze blue, Prus-
sian blue, Paris blue, Antwerp blue, etc. All of these
colors are intensely rich, strong and inimitable, yet
the pigment cannot be safely recommended for in-
discriminate mixtures. When Prussian blue or any
of its analogues are mixed with white lead of flake
white, the rich sky blue or greenish tint which will
result bleaches over night into a sickly green, but on
exposure to the light for an hour, it comes back to its
original color. This is a chemical effect known to
chemists as "reduction." For certain purposes, Prus-
sian blue is safe and permanent. Several of the ultra-
marines mixed with black will give a shade or tint
which will approximate Prussian blue, but rather than
take any chances the painter is advised to avoid the
use of Prussian blue, or any color which may be partly
composed of this material, excepting for sky effects
when mixed with zinc. The so-called chrome greens
are Prussian blue mixed with yellow, and although they
are strong and brilliant, they lose their brilliancy
after some years.

Prussian blue is a good drier, and when used alone
is perfectly permanent, provided it is unglazed or
painted over a solid ground. When varnished with
an oil varnish, or when mixed with megilp or copal,
it turns green, but used by itself the author can pos-
itively state that in three years it shows no change.

Permanent Painting

It has very great opacity, and is similar to indigo in
appearance. It is far superior to indigo and is a good
drier.

The Prussian blues can be safely mixed with zinc
and the sienna colors.

PRUSSIAN BROWN

When Prussian blue is heated, and the cyanogen
driven off, it is converted into a form of oxide of iron,
which has a rich, deep, chocolate color that is abso-
lutely permanent and perfectly reliable, and is such a
stable compound that when mixed with madder lake
it does not decompose the madder. It is not only a
good drier, but a flexible drier, and after a lapse of
many years Prussian brown remains soft and flex-
ible without showing any tendency whatever to crack.
It is frequently used mixed with burnt umber, in
order to prevent the burnt umber from drying too hard.
It is also made by subjecting Prussian blue to ammonia,
but this pigment is not as stable as the color made by
the hot or burning process.

PRUSSIAN GREEN

Prussian green is a mixture of yellow lake and
Prussian blue, undesirable and unreliable. A better
and more permanent Prussian green can be made by
mixing raw sienna with Prussian blue.

Permanent Painting

PURE SCARLET (See Scarlet)

PURPLE LAKE

Purple lake is a deep, crimson lake, generally made
from the extract of hypernic, which is a variety of
wood lake, and is not much more permanent than one
of the aniline lakes. It possesses no quality which
should recommend it in preference to purple madder,
which is very much more permanent.

PURPLE MADDER

This is a deep variety of madder lake, just as per-
manent as any one of the madders, but it must not
be mixed with a metallic drier, or with any one of the
lead pigments or ochres. It is a slow drier, but its
drying can be hastened by exposure to sunlight.

RAW SIENNA

This is one of the safest pigments to use, and works
well with every color, except the lake colors. In com-
position it is similar to ochre, with the exception that
it is four times as strong, or in other words, contains
four times as much iron, but the iron which it con-
tains is the hydrated form, hence the color is translu-
cent. It is composed of a native earth originally found
in and near Sienna, Italy, and was used by the ancient

Permanent Painting

painters. There are a large variety of raw siennas,
some of which approach closely a yellow lake. All
of them are more or less adapted for the purpose of
glazing. Sienna when used in dilute form is almost
transparent, and under any circumstances excepting
those mentioned, is absolutely permanent with the
possible exception that it darkens very slightly after
many years. A mixture of raw sienna and white lead
or zinc white becomes more mellow in time. It is a
good drier.

RAW UMBER

This pigment is somewhat similar to the raw sienna,
with the exception that it contains manganese, and
is found not only in Italy but in certain parts of Ger-
many, Cypress and Turkey, and among paint manu-
facturers the name of Turkey raw umber is applied
to practically all the umbers which are found. in south-
ern Europe.

It is a translucent color having a peculiar olive
brown shade, and cannot be said to be uniform for
there are raw umbers which vary in shade from a light
yellowish olive to a very deep brownish green. It is
a most excellent drier, but has a decomposing effect
upon lake colors. It may be very safely used as a
glaze, and like the siennas it has a tendency to darken
very slightly.

It is a very strong drier and is often used like burnt
umber with black to hasten the drying of the black.

Permanent Painting

It is permanent when used alone and permanent when
mixed with blacks, umbers, siennas, ochres and zinc
white.

REMBRANDT'S MADDER AND
RUBEN'S MADDER

It is very likely that Rembrandt, Ruben and Franz
Hals used madder lake, but Franz Hals evidently was
better acquainted with its technical use than any other
painter of his time. The brilliant, rubicund flesh tints
are almost perfectly preserved to-day, and a minute
careful examination reveals the fact that he used
madder lake as a glaze only after the under-coats were
thoroughly dry.

Why these particular shades of madder should be
called Ruben's madder and Rembrandt's madder is
merely a question of sentiment, as none of the lakes
known under that name differ materially from any
ether madder lakes. In any case, they are reliable
when kept away from the ochre or lead colors, and are
perfectly reliable when glazed over the dry colors
which otherwise decompose them.

ROMAN OCHRE

Roman ochre is a native ochre, identical in compo-
sition with French ochre or Oxford ochre, and has
some of the characteristics of a mixture of ochre and
raw sienna. It is stronger in tinting power than the

Permanent Painting

French ochre, which would indicate that it is a species
of sienna, perfectly permanent and reliable, excepting
with lakes.

ROMAN OCHRE, COOL

The description of Roman ochre answers this, only
it is a different shade.

ROMAN SEPIA (See Sepia)

ROSE DOREE

This is a yellowish shade of madder, and the general
description of all the madder lakes applies to this pig-
ment.

ROSE LAKE

Rose lake is an aniline color, precipitated on alum-
ina, exceedingly brilliant when first applied, but per-
fectly unreliable and not to be recommended for any
painting purposes whatever.

ROSE MADDER, RUBEN'S MADDER
(See Madder Lake)

SAP GREEN

Originally this was a transparent green lake which
was extracted from myrtle leaves, and known under

Permanent Painting

the chemical name of chlorophyll. Whether used as
an oil color or a water color, it is thoroughly unre-
liable, because if it is a green made from the green
coloring matter of certain plants, it will turn to a
brilliant yellow in the presence of white lead during
the process of drying, and will turn dark green again
after it is exposed to the air. It is unreliable and not
to be recommended. The sap greens sold in tube
colors, however, are mixtures of yellow lake, Prussian
blue or ultramarine blue, and in any case are not per-
manent to light and therefore should be excluded. It
dries very badly.

SCARLET RED

When this color is made of a very deep orange
chrome yellow, it can easily be detected by its exces-
sive weight. A tube of it lying on the palm of the
hand feels as if it were lead. In reality it is a lead
color toned with orange mineral. It may be made also
entirely of orange mineral, which is a form of red
lead and minium. Its principal defect is that it is
easily attacked by sulphureted hydrogen. Inasmuch
as scarlet red and orange mineral are both identical
in shade with orange vermilion, it is much safer to use
orange vermilion, although orange mineral or scarlet
red, when properly varnished and not mixed with any
color, is permanent.

Permanent Painting

SCARLET LAKE

This is madder lake mixed with orange mineral, and
lately the author has seen samples of scarlet lake which
were composed of orange mineral stained with paran-
itraniline red. Madder scarlet has a slight tendency
to bleach, and a para scarlet has a slight tendency to
darken. The safest course would therefore be to use
any shade of quick silver vermilion, and when dry
glaze it with madder.

SCARLET MADDER (See Madder Lake)
SCARLET VERMILION (See Orange Vermilion)

SEPIA

Sepia is either the juice of the cuttle-fish, which
this fish uses as a form of natural protection, or is
the extract of walnut. The cuttle-fish, when passing
through a dangerous zone, obscures the water by eject-
ing an organic coloring matter, and then hides in this
darkened zone. As an oil color, neither of these ex-
tracts are of much use, although walnut stain gives a
very transparent glaze, but takes so long to dry that
it cannot be recommended. Painters, as a rule, mix
their own sepia for oil color, one form being a mixture
of madder lake and burnt umber, which is very
permanent, and another form being carbon black and

Permanent Painting

vandyke brown. However, lampblack, raw sienna and
burnt umber make a very permanent sepia which, for
glazing, is thoroughly reliable, and which dries very
well.

SILVER WHITE

This is a precipitated white lead. The painter can
very well omit this pigment from his palette for zinc
white or permanent white could be substituted.

SKY BLUE

This is a yellowish shade of blue, composed, as a
rule, of ultramarine blue very faintly tinted with zinc
yellow. It is a very permanent color and dries well. It
is easy for the painter to mix his own shades for skies.

SMALT

This is powdered blue glass, which has been col-
ored with oxide of cobalt. It has, of course, no hiding
power, and the principal excuse for its use is the lum-
inous effects which it produces. It is perfectly per-
manent, and finds its principal use for painting trans-
parencies on glass. When sold as an oil color, in tubes,
it is really ground and mixed in a vehicle of gum
arabic and glycerine, and unless the painter is familiar
with it, it is likely to curl from any oily surface to

Permanent Painting

which it may be applied, and thus defeats the object
of its use.

TERRE ROSE

This is a translucent clay colored with red oxide of
iron, and when the red oxide, from which it is made,
is thoroughly burnt and washed, it may be regarded
as permanent under all conditions. It dries very well
and works freely under the brush.

TERRE VERTE

This is a bluish green transparent color which is a
clay tinted with a green hydrated oxide of iron. It
has always been regarded as a permanent glazing col-
or, but it is permanent only after it is varnished, but
never before. The iron oxide in terre verte is of
such a chemical nature that it changes slightly, and this
process of decomposition is quite well understood by
chemists. It has a disastrous effect upon the lake
colors, and therefore it is much safer to use it alone.

TOUR'S ORANGE MINERAL, OR TOUR'S RED

This is a French oxide of lead made by calcining
white lead. It has the brilliant color of orange quick
silver vermilion, and is perfectly permanent to light.
It is quickly affected by sulphureted hydrogen, and

Permanent Painting

bleaches or pales slightly when subjected to sulphur
acids. These defects, however, are not apparent after
it is varnished. It is much cheaper than quick silver
vermilion, but not as reliable. It is an excellent drier.
It is also used as a base for making the vermilion
substitutes, because it does not saponify or become
hard in the tube. There are a large variety of these
substitute vermilions, some of them stained with para
red and some stained with madder. The para red
vermilions darken in the sunlight, but the madder
vermilions are more permanent. As a ground color
Tour's red or orange mineral is very reliable.

TRANSPARENT GOLD OCHRE

This is a species of ochre similar to Roman ochre,
and is really a form of raw sienna. The description
of raw sienna applies to this pigment.

TUSCAN RED

When madder lake is precipitated on Indian red
as a base and a pigment is formed which has a dull,
rose shade that may be regarded as absolutely perma-
nent. There is a painting in the National Gallery of
London, by Hubert Van Eyck, of a man with a rose
colored cloak, in which the colors evidently used were
oxide of iron and madder lake over a white ground.
The author finds that some of the Indian reds on the

Permanent Painting

market are oxides of iron stained with madder, and,
as stated in a previous chapter, when oxide of iron
is thoroughly burnt so that it contains no water of
combination, it does not decompose madder lake.
Tuscan red dries very well and is very reliable.

ULTRAMARINE BLUE

Ultramarine blue whether it is artificial or genuine
is chemically the same, with the one difference that
the genuine ultramarine blue is the powdered mineral
known as lapis lazuli, and ordinarily is the blue known
under that name, but the mineral itself is found at times
in an impure state either admixed with slate or gang-
rock, or contaminated slightly with other minerals, and
the genuine ultramarine blue may run, therefore, from
a very deep blue to a very pale ashen blue, in fact,
the lapis lazuli which lies adjacent to the gang-rock is
ground up and sold under the name of ultramarine
ashes, which is nothing more nor less than a very
weak variety of genuine ultramarine blue.

From the standpoint of exposure to light or drying
quality, the artificial ultramarine is just as good as the
genuine, and the only advantage that the genuine has
over the artificial is that the genuine is not so quickly
affected by acids as the artificial is.

It may be of interest to know that in 1814 Tessaert
observed the accidental production in a soda oven at
St. Gobain (France) of a blue substance which

Permanent Painting

Vanquelin declared to be identical with lapis lazuli.

In the following year the same observation was
made by Huhlmann (at St. Gobain, in a sulphate
oven) and by Hermann in the soda works at Schoene-
beck (Prussia).

In 1824 La Societe'd'Encouragement pour Indus-
trie offered a prize of 6000 francs for the production
of artificial ultramarine which, in 1828, was awarded
to J. B. Guinet, a pharmacist of Toulouse, later of
Lyons, who asserted that he first produced ultramarine
in 1826. Vanquelin was one of the three "trustees"
holding the secret contrary to the rule of the Societe'.

In December, 1828, Gmelin of Goettingen explained
his process of making artificial ultramarine before the
Acadamie des Sciences of Paris. He used as the basis
a mixture of precipitated hydrate of alumina and silex,
which was, later on, superseded by China clay (kaolin).

In 1829 Koettig produced ultramarine at the Royal
Saxon Porcelain factory at Meissen.

In 1834 Leverkus, at Wermelskirchen, and later at
Leverkusen, on the Rhine, produced the pigment.

In 1837 Leykauf & Zeltner, at Nueremberg, intro-
duced the manufacture of ultramarine into Germany.

Prices of ultramarine in 1830 :

Natural $50.25 per pound

Artificial 4.05 per pound

Ultramarine is composed of alumina, silica, soda
and sulphur, as follows :

Ultramarine (pure blue) containing a minimum of

Permanent Painting

silica seems to be a more or less well defined chemical
body, i. e., a double silicate of sodium and aluminum
with sulphur as a poly-sulphide of sodium, or as a
thio-sulphate.

Poor Rich

Ultramarines in Silica in Silica

Undecomposed 1.80 2.60

R. Hoffman gives the following proportions:

Alumina Silica

Poor in silica 100 128

Rich in silica 100 170

In resistance to alum the different products rank as
follows :

Lapis Lazuli first

Artif. Ultramarine (rich in silica) second

Artif. Ultramarine (poor in silica) third

In 1859 Leykauf discovered the purple and red
varieties of ultramarine which were produced by the
action of hydrochloric and nitric acids, and by heating
ultramarine with calcium chloride, magnesium chloride
and various other chemicals. In this way there were
produced a variety of shades, and by the addition of
such substances as silver, selenium and tellurium, even
yellow, brown, purple and green shades were produced.

All of these colored ultramarines are exceedingly

Permanent Painting

permanent to light, but have little or no hiding power,
and when used alone are perfectly permanent.

The ultramarine blue which is made by means of a
potash salt instead of a soda salt has every analogy
of color and shade to genuine cobalt blue, excepting
that the genuine cobalt blue is not affected by acids
as rapidly as the artificial.

ULTRAMARINE, GENUINE (See Ultramarine Blue)

ULTRAMARINE ASH

This may be called a weak variety of ultramarine
blue either artificial or natural. It is obtained when
artificial ultramarine blue is mixed with clay, or when
natural lapis lazuli is mixed with the gang rock 01
native earth that surrounds it. Both the genuine and
the artificial ultramarines are perfectly permanent when
used alone, and permanent when mixed with zinc
white and cadmium yellow, but not permanent when
mixed with flake white or any color that may contain
lead.

VANDYKE BROWN

Vandyke brown is a native earth, and is identical
with cassel brown. It is popularly supposed that Van-
dyke first used this pigment as a glazing color in place
of bitumen, and as it is composed of clay, iron oxide,
decomposed wood and some bituminous products, it

Permanent Painting

is fairly translucent and adapts itself for glazing pur-
poses. Because of the bitumen which it contains, it
dries very badly and very slowly, and has a tendency
to crack or wrinkle if the under-coat is either too hard
or too soft. Concerning its permanence, there can
be no doubt that it darkens considerably on exposure
like all the bituminous compounds, and many painters
use a permanent glaze composed of a mixture of ochre
and black tinted with umber. Where the effect of age
is to be simulated, there is no objection to its use.

VANDYKE MADDER

This is a madder lake mixed with either Vandyke
brown, umber or black. If the artist prepares the pig-
ment himself, it is safer for him to use lamp black and
madder lake, for the iron content of Vandyke brown
or umber have a decomposing effect upon the madder.

VENETIAN RED

This is a pure bright form of oxide of iron which
in the early days was a native hematite, selected by
the artist for brilliancy of color. It was also made by
the early Italian painters by calcining ochres and
siennas, and then selecting the product as to shade and
brilliancy. Venetian red is permanent, dries well, and
is reliable, but has a tendency to darken when exposed
to bright light. The Venetian red of commerce is

Permanent Painting

a mixture of gypsum and oxide of iron which is more
permanent to light than the pure oxide of iron, and
neither fades nor darkens, but should not be mixed
with any lake. It dries well, and has complete hiding
power. It is frequently used as a mixture with white
as a ground color for portrait painting, but should al-
ways be permitted to dry most thoroughly before being
painted over, for the reason that it dries so hard that
it may crack under subsequent painting.

VERDIGRIS

This color is produced by subjecting copper to the
action of vinegar, and is therefore a form of acetate
of copper. When used alone, and properly protected,
it is fairly permanent to light, but has a violet chem-
ical action on every one of the organic pigments and
lakes, and affects many of the inorganic pigments. It
is popularly supposed that the ancients used it as a
glazing color, but this is very doubtful, in view of the
fact that the ancients worked more with malachite
green than they did with verdigris. It is thoroughly
unreliable, and should not be used, even though it
may not fade. It is affected by sulphur gases and dries
slowly.

VERMILION, PALE, MEDIUM AND DARK
(See French Vermilion)

Permanent Painting

VERONA BROWN

Verona brown is a fancy name given to a mixture of
burnt sienna and burnt umber, or raw sienna and burnt
umber. It is a permanent color, unaffected by, but
has a deleterious action on, some of the lakes. As
a glazing color, it is reliable, and is to be recommended.

VERONESE GREEN

It is supposed that Paul Veronese was the first
painter to use this pigment, and if he did, it is very
likely that the green he used was a mixture of raw
sienna and permanent blue (lapis lazuli). There is a
tradition that the original Veronese green was terre
verte or ground green earth, but green earth is so
exceedingly weak and such an indistinct green that
it is more than likely that the former combination was
the original green. When raw sienna and permanent
blue are mixed they form a permanent and reliable
pigment.

VIOLET CARMINE

It would appear that this pigment is made from the
hypernic wood or Brazil wood, and as such is thor-
oughly unreliable from the standpoint of permanence.
Similar shades can be made by mixing madder with
other pigments which would be permanent, and there-

Permanent Painting

fore violet carmine, when made from a wood lake,
has no place on the painter's palette.

VIRIDIAN

This is a form of chrome oxide which is quite trans-
parent, and while not very brilliant as compared, for
instance, with emerald green, is a thoroughly safe and
reliable color. It evidently has been known for many
years, and when exposed to the light does not show
any perceptible change, nor is it affected by any gases
in the atmosphere. It has all the characteristics of
oxide of chromium, and has the same chemical com-
position with the addition of water as a hydrate or
water of combination. In its effect it is similar to a
lake, and can be used for glazing. It forms a valuable
pigment for the painter, and is thoroughly reliable.
It dries well.

WARM SEPIA

This is generally made by mixing a sienna or ochre
with madder lake. As a mixture for oil painting, this
mixture is very undesirable, for the iron in the ochre
or sienna decomposes the madder, and as a water color
the same result is obtained, with the exception that it
takes much longer to manifest itself. This color is
not to be recommended.

Permanent Painting

YELLOW CARMINE

This pigment is a misnomer, there being no such
thing as yellow carmine. The pigment sold is a yel-
low lake similar to Italian pink or Dutch pink, fades
very rapidly, is quickly decomposed, and has no merit
whatever.

YELLOW LAKE

All yellow lakes which the author has examined
are in the same class with Dutch pink, Italian yellow,
yellow carmine, etc., and are thoroughly undesirable.
The author has, however, made a yellow lake from
paranitraniline which is intensely powerful, has ten
times the tinctorial power of quercitron lake or Dutch
pink, and has shown itself absolutely permanent when
used alone for over one year, but when mixed with
the metallic pigments, it does not bleach but darkens.
The author has not made this with any commercial
purpose in view, but simply as a matter of experi-
ment, for the purpose of producing a permanent yel-
low glazing color. There is no reason why the reputa-
ble tube manufacturers should not produce a perfectly
permanent yellow lake.

YELLOW OCHRE

This is a native clay colored with about 20 per cent,
of iron rust previously described under the head of

Permanent Painting

Roman ochre, etc., very permanent, and can be mixed
with other mineral pigments. It has the same destruc-
tive effect upon the lake colors that the sienna earths
and other ochres have. When exposed to the bright
light for a year, it has a tendency to darken very
slightly. It is a good drier.

ZINC WHITE

This is a pure form of zinc oxide, permanent under
any and all conditions, but having the defect of drying
very hard. To overcome this it should always be mixed
with pure raw unbleached linseed oil, and although it
is a very slow drier at first, its drying is progressive,
for it evidently combines with the linseed oil. It has
been suggested by some writers that zinc oxide should
be mixed with beeswax or castor oil, or other semi
and non-drying compounds, but such advice should by
no means be followed. When zinc white is mixed with
a semi or non-drying medium and exposed to bright
sunlight in the summer time, it is very likely to sag
and run, even years after it has been applied. There
is a great deal of discussion concerning the trans-
parency or lack of opacity of zinc white, but this is
largely a fiction. Any painter, who uses a color in
microscopic quantities, cannot expect it to hide the
pigment over which it is placed. Zinc white liberally
applied, one one-hundredth of an inch thick, for in-
stance, will totally obscure black, while many painters

Permanent Painting

apply their colors to the depth of one-eighth of an inch.
Zinc oxide is popularly supposed to be unaffected by
sulphur gases. This is not strictly true. It is affected
by sulphur gases just as quickly as white lead, the
difference being that the result in the case of zinc
oxide is not visible, because the sulphur compounds
of zinc, such as the sulphide with sulphureted hydro-
gen, sulphite of zinc with sulphurous acid, and sul-
phate of zinc with sulphuric acid, are all white com-
pounds, just as white as the zinc oxide itself, while
lead forms a black compound with sulphureted hydro-
gen. Hence, we assume that these gases do not affect
zinc, because we cannot see the result, but chemically
we know that they do. Zinc oxide can be mixed with
any color and may be freely used.

ZINNOBAR GREEN, LIGHT, MEDIUM AND DARK

Because Zinnobar red or Zinnober was a permanent
red, some manufacturers have made a Zinnobar green,
and have sold it more or less on the implication of ex-
cellence on account of the name.

Zinnobar green of commerce; which is now made
by only a few tube manufacturers, is a mixture of
Prussian blue and chrome yellow, sometimes reduced
with whiting and sometimes with zinc. In any case,
this color should not be used, and while it is not as
fugitive as emerald green, and not as quickly affected
as a green lake, there are too many conditions under

Permanent Painting

which this color may fail, and therefore it is not to be
recommended. It is quite natural to suppose that this
color has all the defects of Prussian blue and chrome
yellow both as to decomposition and actinic quality,
yet a sample of Zinnobar green, deep, used alone and
allowed to dry before being varnished over, will not
show any decomposition for two years, but as there
are other more permanent greens for the painter to
use, it is far wiser for him not to use Zinnobar green
on his palette.

Permanent Painting

CHAPTER XV
THE PERMANENT COLORS

THE following is a list of pigments which can
be mixed with each other or used separately,
and which are not affected by light, nor do
they interact upon each other :

Lamp black

Ivory black

Graphite

Plumbago, or any form of carbon or carbonaceous
black

Zinc white, or any form of oxide of zinc

Permanent white, or any form of artificial barium
sulphate

Venetian red

Indian red

Burnt umber

Raw umber

Raw sienna

Burnt sienna
and the various mars reds, orange, brown and purple.

Oxide of chromium, transparent

Oxide of chromium, viridian

Terre verte

Permanent Painting

The vermilions made from sulphide of mercury.

Blue, ultramarine blues, native or artificial

Brown, burnt umber and all oxide of iron browns.

Cadmium yellow to orange.

From a chemical standpoint these are practically
the only colors which may be mixed with each other
that will not react, and I have purposely omitted a
number of so-called permanent colors in this schedule,
such as, for instance, the madder colors, which I find
will decompose when mixed with ochres, as well as if a
faint trace of acid is left in the oil. I have omitted
the madder lakes, for although they are permanent,
they cannot be indiscriminately mixed with other pig-
ments.

Permanent Painting

CHAPTER XVI
PIGMENTS DANGEROUS TO HEALTH

NEARLY all of the pigments are poisonous, and
as some artistic pamters from time immemorial
have been accustomed to use the fingers in
shading and in grading tints, particularly in portrait
work, it is essential to know which of the colors are
poisonous and which are not, as pigments may easily
be absorbed through the skin as well as by taking them
internally. In medical practice, for instance, a solu-
tion of iodine is painted on the skin and is ab-
sorbed in that way into the system. So likewise it
is possible to absorb colors through the skin, particu-
larly under the finger nails. The unbroken skin is
supposed to be impervious, yet lead poisoning may
result through the actual manipulation of lead pig-
ments, and it behooves the painter to be very careful
in the use of his or her fingers in the manipulation of
certain pigments.

The worst results are produced by the use of lead
pigments, for it appears that the arsenic and copper
pigments which are more poisonous if taken inter-
nally are not so easily absorbed through the skin.

First in the list of dangerous pigments is flake white,

Permanent Painting

which is easily absorbed and produces lead poisoning.
Many painters have the habit of blending colors on
the palms of their hands either with a brush or with
a finger, and due care should be taken to remove the
colors as soon as the desired effect is produced on
the canvas. The pigments which are absorbed into
the skin are flake white, chrome yellow, chrome green,
Naples yellow, red lead and orange mineral. These
are the lead colors principally used. The arsenic col-
ors are Paris green, emerald green and orpiment.
There are a number of other poisonous colors such
as mercury vermilion, verdigris, etc., which are, how-
ever, not frequently used by the painter. Prussian blue
which is a cyanide blue is supposed to be a poisonous
color, but in reality it is not. Zinc white, permanent
white, baryta white and ultramarine are non-
poisonous. All the blacks, siennas, umbers, ochres, car-
mine, red oxides and many of the lakes are non-
poisonous, but the best rule to follow is to clean the
hands with soap and water after having stained them
with colors.

Permanent Painting

CHAPTER XVII

PIGMENTS WHICH ARE AFFECTED BY

SULPHUR GASES AND COAL SMOKE

ALSO THE PIGMENTS WHICH ARE

AFFECTED BY LIGHT

I

T has been demonstrated by numerous writers, and
particularly by Prof. Chas. Baskerville * that in all
large communities there exists sulphuric acid in the

* Baskerville made a numL'er of determinations of the sulphur dioxide
content of the air of New York City. Stations were established
throughout greater New York, including the high office buildings, parks,
subways, and railroad tunnels. Very variable results, as might be
expected, were obtained.

The determinations may, in part, be thus summarized:

Locality SO a in parts per million

Elevated portion of the city near a high stack 3.14

Various parks 0.84 (maximum, others negative)

Railroad tunnels 8.54 — 31.50

Subway None

Downtown region 1.05 — 5.60

Localities near a railroad 1.12 — 8.40

A total quantity of 1300 tons of sulphur dioxide, calculated as 80
per cent, sulphuric acid, is discharged every twenty-four hours into
the air of New York City from the combustion of coal alone.

From an economic standpoint, this is an enormous, partly avoidable,
waste, while from a sanitary standpoint, any disinfecting action it
exerts on the organic wastes arising from the streets is greatly counter-
balanced by its general injurious effects, t

t Paper read before the Society of Chemical Industry, Feb., 1909.
These may be thus summarized:

Permanent Painting

1. Its presence in atmospheric air is a menace to hygienic welfare,
since it has serious effects on susceptible persons and particularly
exerts deleterious effects upon the respiratory organs. SOa in the air
of manufactories tends to produce bronchitis and anaemia.

2. It exerts an injurious action on plant life. In this action, it
is less violent than hydrogen chloride, sulphuric acid, and fluorine;
but owing to its less solubility and consequent slower condensation it
has a wider distribution. In Manchester, England, in 1891, it was
learned that the greatest injury to plant life is due to the emana-
tions from dwelling houses.

3. The condensation of sulphurous acid with moisture in fogs and
hoar frosts seriously affects goods printed with colors sensitive to
sulphurous acid; for example, logwood, Brazil wood shades, and
aniline black.

4. Sulphur dioxide proceeding from the combustion of coal and
coal-gas, the quantity of which in towns is considerable, necessarily
destroys the ozone of the air. This may account for the definite
variations of the proportion of ozone observed at various localities.

5. In anti - cyclonic periods the amount of sulphur dioxide rises con-
siderably and at such times this increase is accompanied by at least
as large an increase in the amount of organic impurities. (Baskerville.)

Where there is much soft coal consumed in a certain district, the
trick and stone become coated with particles of carbon. This deposit
causes marble and other light-colored materials to take a funeral as-
pect and not only that, it causes some stone to decay. St. Paul's
Cathedral in London is a notable example of this as shown by Church.
In other cases the sulphur gases attack the mortar or cement. This
is due to the fact that sulphur dioxide accumulates on the soot and other
solids, where it is oxidized to sulphuric acid.

In the manufacture of sulphuric acid used for purifying crude oil
and for other purposes, the escape of sulphurous acid fumes from the
Exits often constitutes a decided nuisance. Not only is vegetation
injured and often killed in nearby sections, but the health of the
residents in the neighborhood is injuriously affected by breathing the
poisonous vapors, throat troubles of a chronic nature often resulting.
However, injuries are often attributed to sulphuric acid factories,
when in fact they are innocent. Compliance with the requirements
of the English Alkali Act of Lord Derby, effectually prevents any
serious injury. Temporary discomfort and even serious injury may
result, however, through an accident in the works. Manufacturers
wish to avoid and also prevent the escape of sulphur dioxide, for all
that is lost diminishes profits. Corrective devices are applied by the
works' owners.

Permanent Painting

air, and many of the colors which we have regarded
as permanent to light, are not permanent to the ef-
fects of acid gases. In a general way this rule ap-
plies also to the colors affected by sulphureted hydro-
gen. If we take, for instance, red lead, which is the
red oxide of lead, and expose it to the air of a city, it
apparently bleaches white. The same red lead when
varnished and covered with glass may be exposed for
ages, and will not be affected. We note the former
change particularly on steel structures like bridges
which have been painted with red lead and on which
the color sometimes bleaches from a pure scarlet to
a pale pink. On rubbing such a surface with linseed
oil and turpentine the original color comes back in all
its brilliancy. Upon investigation, we find that the
sulphuric acid has affected the color and formed a
minute crystalline surface of sulphate of lead, which
is white. Chrome yellow will be affected in the same
way. Improperly washed prussian blue will likewise
bleach, and flake white is affected in identically the
same manner, with the exception, that the change
cannot be noted by the eye, but if a flake white surface
which has been exposed to the elements is rubbed with
a black cloth, a white chalky deposit will stain the
cloth. This is known as chalking, and mural decora-
tions which cannot very well be varnished and pro-
tected, should therefore be executed with pigments
that are not affected by the acid gases of sulphur. Near-
ly all the pigments are affected, with the exception of

Permanent Painting

the blacks. The ochres, siennas and the earth colors
which are exceedingly permanent show this defect
to a less degree, although, as compared with the chem-
ical colors like prussian blue, the lakes, cadmium yel-
low and the lead colors, but paintings which are kept
in a pure atmosphere under glass are necessarily pre-
served, and water colors are more susceptible than
any other form of painting.

These acid gases are produced during the burning of
coal, and as the combustion of coal is more or less
incomplete, soot may deposit upon the surface of a
painting, particularly decorations in a locality where
soft coal is used. This is particularly true of locali-
ties like Sheffield, England ; Pittsburgh, U. S. A., and
Chicago, U. S. A. There are, however, many paint-
ings such as, for instance, the Horse Fair by Rosa
Bonheur, which cannot be covered by means of glass,
and paintings of such magnitude should be kept care-
fully varnished to prevent any disintegration from the
acid gases. The canvas upon which most of these large
paintings are executed is either composed of flax
which is equal to linen, or cotton fibre, or a mixture
of both, and these fabrics are particularly susceptible
to the action of acid gases. The chemical method of
determining the difference between cotton and wool
consists in dissolving out the wool with caustic pot-
ash, which leaves the cotton, intact, and vice versa, we
may take an acid re-agent which will not attack the
wool but will dissolve the cotton. In time, therefore,

Permanent Painting

the canvas would be weakened, and its strength re-
duced through the action of these moist acid gases,
which demonstrates the advisability of either painting
the back of a canvas, or mounting it upon a wood
or metal support. In the case of a very large paint-
ing a sheet of metal could not be fabricated which
would be sufficiently light and rigid for this purpose,
but a seasoned wood support could be constructed.
However under all circumstances the back of the can-
vas should be painted to prevent this disintegration.

In case a canvas is very thin, and there is danger
of the protecting coat on the back soaking through, it
is advisable to put on a thin glue size before applying
the protective coat.

In this list must be included all colors which contain
metallic bases, such as lead, copper and antimony.
The colors which are affected are as follows :

Flake White
Silver White
Cremnitz White
Lemon Yellow made 01

chrome yellow
Chrome Yellow

Naples Yellow
Chrome Green
Paris Green
Emerald Green
Verdigris
Zinnober Green

Permanent Painting

CHAPTER XVIII
WATER IN TUBE COLORS

UNDER normal conditions, if you take heavy
pigments like white lead, oxide of iron, etc.,
and grind them in linseed or poppy oil, the
oil will eventually float to the top and the pigment
will settle hard to the bottom, yet nearly all the tube
colors remain soft and fresh, and apparently the law
of gravity is overcome in some way.

A large number of the colors are kept in suspension
because the manufacturer adds water to the oil, and
makes an emulsion which keeps the pigment suspend-
ed. This is particularly true of the whites, and it must
be admitted that a small percentage of water added
to the pigment or the oil during the process of man-
facture does not do any ultimate harm, yet, some tube
manufacturers use such an excessive quantity of water
that where paint is very smoothly applied the water
evaporates quite rapidly and leaves the subsequent
film in a spongy, porous condition. If a picture were
to be put away in a perfectly clean atmosphere free
from dust no harm would result, or if the precaution
were taken to place a sheet of glass over the picture
and slightly away from it, the picture would dry in

High power photo-micrograph of Flake White which
contains too much water in its composition. The uneven
surface presents an excellent lodging place for dust and
dirt which are hard to rernoi'e.

Permanent Painting

OLORS

Lis, if you take heavy
ead, oxide of iron, etc.,
eed or poppy oil, the

oil ihe pigment

will arly all the tube

I >arently the law

Pt in suspen

because the oil, and
makes an en suspend-
ed. Thi: . and it must
be •<: vater added
to the {• ; of man-
facture d »me tube
manufa< tity of water
that wh-. pplied the water
evaporat the subsequent
filnTirrrr ~~ ' — — i^-a picture were
to flwHpnrtiiiT/. owiiqatiwoapHjptt free

frofinra^So -He- tf°ifta«iflteeautioti

bftsvUirb i< •MV.^Q aanjtu^ ,

were taken to i over trie oicture

and slightly awa re would dr

Permanent Painting

a perfectly clean condition, and would remain so until
it were varnished; but this is not the case, so that if
we examine microscopically a paint film which con-
tains excessive water, we find that the spongy, porous
condition of the surface is a lodging place for dust
and dirt which cannot be readily removed for obvious
physical reasons, and as it seems advisable to add
water to nearly all of the tube colors which will settle
out rapidly and heavily, it is well to acquaint the
painter with this fact in order that the picture be not
subjected to a dry atmosphere which is dusty.

Permanent Painting

CHAPTER XIX

THE PIGMENTS WHICH ARE ABSOLUTELY

PERMANENT WHEN USED ALONE BUT

ARE NOT PERMANENT WHEN

MIXED WITH OTHER COLORS

Madder Lake
Antwerp Blue
Prussian Blue
Paris Blue

Vermilion made of sul-
phide of mercury
Para Red
Lithol Red

Harrison Red

Ultramarine Blue

Cobalt Blue

Hooker's Green (when
made from Prussian
blue and raw sienna)

Ochre

Flake White

The foregoing list of colors must be used with some
judgment. Many of these colors are permanent when
mixed with some other colors, but decompose when
mixed with each other. For instance, yellow ochre
and madder lake when used alone are permanent, yet
the two when mixed will decompose.

Permanent Painting

CHAPTER XX

COLORS WHICH DRY SLOWLY
AND IRREGULARLY

(FROM 3 DAYS TO 2 WEEKS)

Bone Brown
Alizarin Yellow
Crimson Madder
Carmine Lake
Crimson Lake
Brown Madder
French Carmine
French Carmine No. 2
Orange Cadmium
Gamboge
Capucine Madder
Mauve
Magenta
Indian Yellow
Brown Pink
American Vermilion
Madder
Alumina

Cork
and as a rule all

Rose Pink

Transparent Black

Sepia

Scarlet Lake

Rose Doree

Alizarin Green

Yellow Lake

Payne's Gray

Italian Pink

Indigo

Lamp Black

Carbon Black

Olive Lake

Alumina & Prussian
Blue

Sap Green

Violet Carmine

Vandyke Brown
Black
of the Lake colors

Permanent Painting

CHAPTER XXI

THE FAILURE OF SIR JOSHUA
REYNOLD'S PAINTINGS

ONE of the greatest portrait painters who ever
lived and the man who made the most fail-
ures of his art, was Sir Joshua Reynolds, the
obvious reason being that he was always after the
search of the secret of the ancient masters, and as
far as we can deduce, he never made a single inves-
tigation and hardly ever painted two pictures alike
from the technical standpoint. During three years
of his career, he painted on an average one portrait
every three days. He was just as careless at times
in his imitative style as he was in the selection of his
pigments, for many of his clients refused to accept
the pictures after he had finished them, because
they did not resemble the sitter. It was his custom
to paint simply the face and the hands, and per-
mitted his students to fill in the dresses and the
background. In nearly every one of his pictures
that has faded and decomposed only the face and
hands are affected, the rest of the picture being in
perfect condition.

He kept a diary which was written in a jargon of

Permanent Painting

Italian, Latin, English and French, and every time
he made a note, it appears as if he was sure that he
had made a new discovery, and had at last found
what he always thought was the Venetian secret.

The principal cause of his failure was the fact that
all lakes were probably the same to him, and he us-
ually mixed a lake with ochre, which is, of course, a
radical mistake. During his life time many of his
pictures had faded until the faces assumed the ghastly
tint which in medicine is known to be due to chronic
anaemia where the skin blanches and assumes a yel-
lowish gray, and the line of demarcation around the
lips is obliterated. This effect in his pictures is due
to the fact that the lake which he used was not always
madder lake, but weaker lakes produced from berries
and wood, although even madder lake is incompatible
with yellow ochre and with the siennas and umbers,
so that none of the effects which he produced were
permanent.

How strange is the comparison between the work
of Sir Joshua Reynolds and that of Franz Hals and
his contemporaries. Hals used practically the same col-
ors but always glazed with madder lake after the un-
dercoat was thoroughly dry. Painters, as a rule,
know that no earth color or metallic color should be
mixed with a lake, but yet a lake may be used over
every one of the earth colors, including even ochre,
provided the ochre has been allowed to become thor-
oughly dry. The one possible exception to this may be

Permanent Painting

the use of madder lake mixed with English or Chinese
vermilion, because vermilion is a very stable chemical
compound and the madder lake is therefore not de-
composed, with the possible exception that in time
a mixture of madder lake and English vermilion will
darken slightly when exposed to direct sunlight.

If painters will limit the colors used on their pa-
lettes to the least possible number and use only those
which do not interact, as well as exercise a little
judgment in glazing over colors only after they are
thoroughly dry, absolutely permanent results will be
obtained, and the mistakes made by the older men will
not be without profit.

Permanent Painting

INDEX

Page

Abrasion in Cleaning Pictures 58

Abrasion of Surface, When Necessary 59

Absorption of Pigments through the Skin 177

Academy Board 55

Acid Gases, Action on Paint, of 181

Acid in Oils 102

Acetate of Copper 168

Acetone 57

Aging of Linseed Oil 78

Albumen as Paint Medium 9

Alcohol in Spirit Varnish 72

Alizarin Colors 85

Alizarin Green 87

Alizarin Yellow 87

Alligator Cracks, Cause of 89

Alligatoring 46

Almond Oil 1 1

Alumina Hydrate 4 88

Alumina White 88

Aluminum 49

Amber Black 96

Amber Varnish 73

Amyl Acetate as Solvent 57

Amyl Alcohol as Solvent 57

"Anatomy Lesson," of Rembrandt 86

Ancient Painters ; Media Used by 10

Ancient Pigments 22

Aniline Yellow 87

Antwerp Blue 88, 107

Antwerp Blue, Effect of Light and Air on 152

Arsenic Colors 178

Artificial Cobalt Blue in

Permanent Painting

Page

Artificial Cobalt Blue, as Cerulean Blue 106

Artificial Cobalt Blue, in "Davey's Gray" 118

Artificial Ultramarine Blue 163

Artificial Ultramarine Blue, Composition of 165

Artificial Ultramarine Blue, Effect of Acids on 121

Artificial Ultramarine Blue, Action with Other Pigments. .112

Artificial Ultramarine Blue with Prussian Blue 137

Asphaltum 89

Asphaltum, Effect of Light on 36

Asphaltum as Bone Pitch 94

Asphaltum Glaze 32

Asphaltum from Mummies 144

Asphaltum-glazed Paintings 62

Aurelian 90

Aurora Yellow (Cadmium Yellow) 101

Barium Sulphate 37

Baryta White 178

Baskerville, Prof.; Analysis of the Air in Cities 179

Benzene, (See Benzol)

Benzine 69

Benzine as a Solvent 57

Benzine for Cleaning Pictures 58

Benzol 69

Benzol as a Solvent 57

Benzol as a Paint Remover 58

Bistre 91

Bitumen 89

Bitumen, Effect of Light on 36

Bitumen, Harmful Effects of 46

Bitumen from Mummies 144

Bitumen in Vandyke Brown 167

Bitumen Glaze, a Cause of Cracking of Paintings 41

Blacks Used by the Ancients 24

Black Pigments, Indirect Cause of Cracking 44

Black Pigments, Nonpoisonous 178

Black Pigments, Their Permanency 182

Black Pigments, Use in Boiled Oil 79

Black, Ivory 134

Black Lead 91

Blanc Fixe 115

Bleached Linseed Oil 76

Bleached Oils 77

Permanent Painting

Page

Bleaching of Colors 181

Bleaching of Lake Pigments 189

Bleaching of Madder Lake 86

"Bloom" on Pictures 62

Blue Pigments of the Ancients 26

Blue Black 92

Blue, Cerulean 106

Blue, Leitch's 136

Blue Verditer 93

Boiled Linseed Oil 78

Bone Brown 94

Bone Pitch 94

Brazil Wood 30

Brilliant Yellow 134

Bronze Blue 107, 152

Bronze Green 95

Brown, Caledonian 103

Brown, Cappah 103

Brown Pigments of the Ancients 26

Brown Lake 96

Brown Madder 95

Brown Ochre 96

Brown Pink 97

Brown, Prussian 153

Brown Roman Ochre 99

Brown Umber 103

Burnt Carmine 98

Burnt Sienna 99

Burnt Umber 1. 100

Burnt Umber in Glaze to Imitate Asphaltum *. 90

Burnt Umber, Action with Madder Lake 86

Burnt Umber, Possible Effect of its Rapid Drying 46

Cadmium Yellow IOI

Cadmium Yellow, its Use in Bronze Green 95

Cadmium Yellow, its Use in Golden Ochre 127

Cadmium Yellow, Effect on Madder Lake 87

Cadmium Yellow as Orient Madder 148

Calcium Carbonate Used in the Gesso Paintings 26

Calcined Ochre Used by the Ancients 23

Calcined Sienna (See Burnt Sienna)

Caledonian Brown 103

Canvas, Action of Acid Gases on.. ..182

Permanent Painting

Page

Canvas as a Foundation 48

Canvas, Deterioration of 182

Canvas for Oil Painting, Preparation of 53

Canvas in Commercial Practice 53

Canvas Mounting 57

Canvas, Preparation of for Painting 51

Canvas, Priming or Ground Coat Paint for 50, 51

Cappah Brown 103

Caput Mortuum (Mars Violet) 141

Carbon Black 104

Carbon Black in Burnt Carmine 98

Carbon Black in Sepia Substitute 159

Carbonate of Copper 139

Carbon Tetrachloride as Paint Remover 58

Carmine 104

Carmine, Burnt 98

Carmine, Madder 138

Carmine Used in Indian Purple 130

Carmine Lake 105

Carnation Lake 105

Casein Used as Medium 10

Cassel Brown (Vandyke Brown) 166

Cassel Brown Used by the Ancients 26

Cassel Earth 106

Castile Soap for Cleaning Pictures 59

Cause of Cracks in Paintings 40

Causes Affecting the Permanency of Paint Films 41

Cennini, Cennino, on Oil and Varnish 20

Cerulean Blue 106

Cerusite, Known to the Ancients 22

Chalking 181

Charcoal in Blue Black 92

Charcoal (Vine Black) 93

Charcoal Gray 106

Charred Bones, Used as Black Pigment by the Ancients . . 26

Chemistry of Light 68

Chinese Blue 107

Chinese Blue in Antwerp Blue 88

Chinese Blue (Prussian Blue) 152

China Clay 1

Chinese Vermilion 1

Chinese White . ..108

Permanent Painting

Page

Chlorophyll ( Sap Green) 157

Chlorophyll in Oil 35

Chlorophyll, Bleaching and Recovery of Color 158

Chromate of Barium (Lemon Yellow) 137

Chromate of Barium in Permanent Yellow 150

Chromate of Lead 109

Chromate of Strontium (Lemon Yellow) 137

Chromate of Zinc ( Primrose Yellow) 151

Chromate of Zinc (as Citron Yellow) no

Chromate of Zinc in Cobalt Green 113

Chromate of Zinc in Permanent Yellow 150

Chrome Green 109

Chrome Green, Absorption by Skin 178

Chrome Green, Effect on Madder Lake 86

Chrome Orange 109

Chrome Oxide ( Veridian) 170

Chrome Oxide (Veronese Green) 123

Chrome Red 109

Chrome Vermilion, Renovation of Paintings where Used. 59

Chrome Yellow 109

Chrome Yellow, Absorption by Skin 178

Chrome Yellow, Effect of Acid Gases on 181

Chrome Yellow, In Chrome Green 109

Chrome Yellow, Tinting Material in Golden Ochre 127

Chrome Yellow, Used in Zinnobar Green 173

Cinnibar, Used by the Ancients 25

Cinnibar Green no

Citron Yellow no

Classification of Pigments 81

Clay, Base for Davey's Gray 118

Clay, Basis of Brown Ochre 96

Clay, Occurrence in Black Lead 92

Clay, As Terre Verte and Terre Rose 161

Cleaning of Pictures 56

Climatic Influences Affecting Paintings 45

Coach Makers' Japan 49

Coach Makers' Japan, Utility in Preparing Surfaces for

Painting 51

Coach Painting, Application of Principles of, — to Prepara-
tion of Surfaces 48

Coating to Protect Wooden Panels 43

Cobalt Blue . . .in

Permanent Painting

Page

Cobalt Blue, as Component of Leitch's Blue 137

Cobalt Blue, as Component of Permanent Violet 149

Cobalt Green 113

Cobalt Violet 113

Cobalt Yellow ( Aurelian) 90

Cochineal Bug, Color from the 104

Cochineal Lake 117

Coefficient of Expansion, Consideration of 45

Cologne Earth 114

Color Photography ; Application of Theory 65

Colors Affected by Coal Smoke and Sulphur Gases 179

Colors Used by the Ancient Painters 25

Complimentary Color Sensations 67

Composition of Ultramarine . 165

Compression and Tension in Paintings 42

Constant White 114

Copal Resins, Color Changes of 36

Copal Varnish 71

Copal Megilp 74, 115

Copper as Foundation of Paintings . . 48

Copperas, Crude Material Used in Manufacture of Indian

Red 131

Copper Carbonate Used by Ancient Painters 23

Cork Black 116

Cotton (Canvas) Foundations, Deterioration of 182

Cracking Due to Climatic Conditions 43

Cracking Due to "Compression and Tension" 42

Cracks Due to Alcohol Varnishes 44

Cracks Due to Selective Drying 44

Cracks Due to Unequal Drying Rates of Colors 46

Cracks Due to Varnishing an Undried Picture 44

Cracking of Paintings 40

Cremnitz White 116

Crimson Lake 117

Crimson Madder 117

Crocus Martis 141

Currents of Air, Acceleration of Drying by 75

Cuttlefish Juice (Sepia) 159

Damar Varnish 71, 72

Damar Varnish versus Mastic for Coating Pictures 73

Darkened Pictures, their Renovation 59

Davey's Gray 118

Permanent Painting

Page

Deep Madder 118

Description of Pigments 81

Deterioration, Photo-Chemical, of Oil Paintings 32

Dried Oil Films, Action of Solvents on 58

Driers 74

Drying of Linseed Oil 79

Drying Oils, When First Used 10

Drying Oils 76

Drying of Linseed Oil, The 80

Dutch Pink (Brown Pink) 97

Dutch Pink, its Use in Orange Madder 147

Dutch Process White Lead 120

Earth, Cassel 106

Earth, Cologne 114

Eastlake, Sir Charles, On Early Use of Oil in Painting... II

Effect of Dry Atmosphere on Paintings 40

Eggs Used as Vehicle by Ancient Painters 19

Egyptians, Pigments Used by the 25

Emerald Green 1 18

Emeraud Green

Emerald Green, Absorption by the Skin 178

Emery Cloth for Use in Surfacing 49

English Vermilion in Paintings ; Renovation of 59

Eosine Colors (Geranium Lake) 126

Eraser for Cleaning Pictures 60

Ethyl Alcohol as a Paint Solvent 57

Expansion of Paint Films, Unequal 50

Extract of Gall 125

Extract of Vermilion 1 19

Facius on First Use of Oil in Painting n

"Fatty Linseed Oil" 78

Ferric Ferrocyanide Blue 107

Field's Orange Vermilion 120

Filter for Canvas 42

Flake White 120

Flake White, Action of Acid Gases, etc., on 181

Flake White, Renovation of Darkened Pigment 59

Flake White, Toxic Qualities of 177

Flesh Tints, Composition of, — Used by Franz Hals 85

Flexible Canvas Foundation 51

Flexible Varnish 72

Foundation White 124

Permanent Painting

Page

French Blue 121

French Ochre 127

French Ultramarine 122

French Varnish 72

French Vermilion 122

French Veronese Green 122

Fusel Oil as a Solvent 57

Gall Stone 125

Gamboge 125

Geranium Lake 126

Geranium Madder 126

Gasoline Used for Cleaning 59

Gasoline as a Solvent 69

Gesso 9

Glazing with Burnt Sienna 100

Glue Sizing on Canvas 51, 53

Gmelin, Process of Making Artif. Ultramarine Blue 164

Golden Ochre 127

"Gold Size" Japan 49

Grain Alcohol as a Solvent 57

Graphite (Black Lead) 91

Graphite, Retarding Effect on Drying of Oil 79

Gray, Charcoal 107

Gray Shade of Black Lead 92

Gray, Mineral 142

Green, Alizarin 87

Green, Chrome 109

Green, Cobalt 113

Green, French Veronese 122

Green, Malachite 139

Green, Mountain 139

Green, Prussian . 153

Green Pigments Used by the Ancients 23, 26

Green Earth, Possibly the Green Used by Paul Veronese. 123

Green Lake 127

Guignet Green ..123

Guignet, Production of Artif. Ultramarine Blue by 164

Gum Damar, Effect of Light and Age on 35

Gypsum, Found in Venetian Red 168

Gypsum, Used on Gesso Paintings 22

Hairline Cracks 42

Hals, Franz, Use of Madder Lake by 85, 156

Permanent Painting

Page

Hard-Drying, Semi-Elastic Paint for Backing Canvas 50

Hard-Drying Colors, Effect of Application of, — Over

Graphite 92

Harrison Red 128

Helio Fast Red 128

History of Painting 9

Honey, Its Utilization as a Paint Medium 10

Hookers Green 129

Humidity, Effect of, on Paintings 54

Hydrated Oxide of Cooper (Blue Verditer) 93

Hydrate of Alumina 88

Hypernic Lake (Purple Lake) 154

Hypernic Wood, Pigment Made from 169

Imitation of Bistre 91

Imitation of Natural Sepia 159

Imitation of the Yellowing of Age 72

Impressionism, The School of 64

Indian Blue 129

Indian Lake 130

Indian Purple 130

Indian Red 131

Indian Red, Dark (Mars Violet) 141

Indian Yellow 133

Indican 23, 24

Indigo Used by the Ancients 23, 24

Indigo 133

Influence of Moisture on Canvas 41

Italian Pink 134

Italian Pink ( Brown Pink) 97

Ivory Black 134

Ivory Black, In Mono Chrome Tints 143

Ivory Soap Used in Cleaning Old Paintings 59

Jaqueminot Madder 135

Jan Steen; Method of Glazing Flesh Tints by 86

Japan Varnish Used for Priming 49

Jaune Brilliant 134

Kauri Gum Varnish 71, 73

King's Yellow 135

Koettig, Production of Ultramarine Blue by 164

Krems White 1 16

Lake, Brown 96

Lake, Carmine 105

Permanent Painting

Page

Lake, Carnation 105

Lake, Indian , 130

Lake, Madder 138

Lake, Mauve 142

Lakes Known to the Ancients 27

Lakes, Effect of Boiled Oil on 79

Lake White 88

Lampblack 136

Lampblack ( Bistre) 91

Lampblack, Harmful Effects of the Slow Drying of 44, 46

Lampblack in Composition of Brown Madder 96

Lampblack in Composition of Flexible Priming 51

Lampblack, Slow Drying Action of 79

Lampblack, Utilization in Mono-Chrome Tints 143

Lapis Lazuli (Natural Ultramarine Blue) 163

Lapis Lazuli as the Coloring Matter of Mineral Gray 142

Lapis Lazuli Used by the Ancients 22, 26

Lapis Lazuli versus Ultramarine Blue 121

Lavender Oil 69

Lead Poisoning 177

Leitch's Blue 136

Lemon Chrome Yellow 135

Lemon Yellow 137

Leykauf, Discovery of Purple and Red Ultramarine Blue

(Artificial) by 165

Light, Effect of, on Asphaltum and Bitumen 36

Light Red 137

Linoxyn 80

Linseed Oil 76

Linseed Oil, Aging of 78

Linseed Oil, Bleached 76

Linseed Oil, Drying Action of, — with Zinc White 75

Linseed Oil, Earliest Description of ir

Linseed Oil, Unaffected by Blanc Fixe 115

Linseed Oil, Quality of, Desirable 38

List of Colors 81

Litharge in Composition of Naples Yellow 144

Livering of Blue Black in Oil 93

Livering of Blue Verditer in Oil 94

Lithopone, Action on Oil of 37

Lumiere Process of Color Photography 65

Madder, Brown 95

Permanent Painting

Page

Madder, Carmine 138

Madder Colors, Incompatibilities of 86, 176

Madder, Crimson 1 17

Madder, Jacqueminot / 135

Madder Lake 138

Madder Lakes (Red and Alizarin Colors) 85

Madder Lake, Action of Driers on 75

Madder Lake, Action of Hydrated Iron Oxide on 86, 176

Madder Lake, Effect of Raw Mineral Pigments on 86

Madder Lake Used as a Glaze 86

Madder Lake Glaze, Care Required in Cleaning 61

Madder Lake in Composition of Brown Lake 96

Madder Lake in Composition of Permanent Violet 149

Madder Lake in the Composition of Vermilion Substitute. 162

Madder Lake in the Composition of Warm Sepia 170

Madder, Orient 148

Madder, Pink 150

Madder, Purple 154

Madder, Rembrandt's and Ruben's 156

Madder, Rose 157

Madder, Scarlet 138

Madder, Vandyke 167

Magenta 139

Malachite Green 139

Mars Brown 140

Mars Colors 140

Mars Orange 140

Mars Red 141

Mars Violet 141

Mars Yellow 141

Masters' Secret, Search for 28

Mastic Varnish 72

Mauve 142

Mechanical Bond Between Paint Coatings 41

Media Used by Ancient Painters 10

Mastic, Use of, — by Flemish Artists 39

Megilp, Copal 74, 115

Megilp as a Cause of Cracking 46

Mercury Vermilion 178

Metal as a Foundation 48

Metallic Soaps as Driers 1 16

Methyl Alcohol as a Solvent 57

Permanent Painting

Page

Methyl Alcohol, Utility for Cleaning Decomposed Bitu-
men Glaze ........................................... 9°

Milori Blue (Chinese Blue) ............................ 107

Milori Blue, Reaction of, with Other Pigments ........... 152

Mineral Gray .......................................... 142

Minium ................................................ 143

Minium, Drying Qualities of ............................. 46

Mixing Pigments, Principles of .......................... 64

Mixing of Pigments; Practiced by Sir Joshua Reynolds. . .189
Moisture, Protection of Wood Panels Against ............ 54

Mono-Chrome Tints .................................... 143

Mountain Green ....................................... 139

Mummy ............................................... 144

Myrtle Leaves, Green Lake Made from .................. 157

Naples Yellow ......................................... 144

Naples Yellow, Reddish ................................. 145

Naphtha ................................................ 69

Naphtha Used for Cleaning Pictures ............... ..... 59

Natural Ultramarine Blue ............................... 131

Neutral Orange ......................................... 145

Neutral Tint ........................................... 145

New Blue .............................................. 146

Non- Permanent Colors ................................. 179

Nottingham White ..................................... 146

Ochre, Brown ......................................... 96

Ochre, Brown Roman .................................. 99

Ochre, Extract of (Mars Yellow) ...................... 141

Ochre, Oxford ......................................... 148

Ochre, Roman ......................................... 156

Ochre, Transparent Gold ............................... 162

Ochre, Yellow ......................................... 171

Oil Copal Varnishes ................................... 71

Oil of Bergamot ....................................... 73

Oil of Lavender .................... ................... 73

Oil Paintings, Photo-Chemical Deterioration of ......... 32

Oils, Acid in .......................................... 102

Olive Green ............................................ 146

Olive Lake ............................................. 147

Olive Madder .......................................... 147

Orange Chrome Yellow (Scarlet Red) .................. 158

Orange Chrome Yellow as Component of Bronze Green.. . 95
Orange Madder ........................................ 147

Permanent Painting

Page

Orange Mineral (Minium) 143

Orange Mineral (as Scarlet Red) 158

Orange Vermilion (Chinese Vermilion) 108

Orange Vermilion, Field's 120

Orient Madder 148

Orpiment 148

Orpiment (King's Yellow) 135

Oxford Ochre 148

Oxford Ochre (Brown Ochre) 97

Oxide of Chromium ( Viridian) 170

Oxide of Chromium (French Veronese Green) 122

Oxide of Cobalt (Cobalt Blue) HI

Oxide of Cobalt as Coloring Matter of Smalt 160

Oxide of Iron (Indian Red) 131

Oxide of Iron (Venetian Red) 167

Oxide of Lead (Minium) 143

Oxide of Lead (Tours Orange Mineral) 161

Oxide of Manganese, Occurrence in Number of 100

Painters' Oil 19

Painting, History of 9

Paintings Yellow with Age, Renovation of 61

Paintings, Photo-Chemical Deterioration of 32

Paint Removers 58

Panels, Protection of Wood 43

Paris Blue 152

Paris Green (Emerald Green) 118

Payne's Gray 149

Permanent Colors, List of 175

Permanent Glaze, Imitation of Asphaltum 90

Permanent Green (See Veridian)

Permanent Violet 149

Permanent White Pigments 38

Permanent White (Zinc White) 172

Permanent Yellow 150

Peroxide of Hydrogen for Restoring Discolored Lead Pig-
ments 61

Persian Berry, Lake Made from 97

Petroleum Spirits 69

Phoenecians, Pigments Used by the 25

Phosphate of Cobalt (Cobalt Violet) 113

Phosphate of Manganese (Perm. Violet) 149

Photo-Chemical Deterioration of Oil Paintings 32

Permanent Painting

Page

Picture Varnishes 71

Pigments Absorbed by the Skin 178

Pigments Affected by Light 179

Pigments Dangerous to Health 177

Pigments which are Absolutely Permanent When Used
Alone, but Not Permanent When Mixed With Otker

Colors 186

Pigments which Dry Slowly and Irregularly 187

Pink, Brown 97

Pink, Dutch (See Brown Pink)

Pink, Italian 134

Pink Madder 150

Plaster of Paris ; Use in Gesso Painting 9, 26

Poisonous Pigments as a Medium 170

Poppy Oil 76

Powder Blue 112

Prevention of Cracking 43, 50

Primary Colors 65

Primary Color Sensations 65

Primary Pigments 64

Priming, Coatings for 5°» 5 *

Primrose Aurelian (See Aurelian)

Primrose Yellow IS1

Progressive Drying 73

Protection of Canvas 183

Prussian Blue 151

Prussian Blue (Chinese Blue) 107

Prussian Blue as Constituent of Antwerp Blue 88

Prussian Blue, Permanency of 181

Prussian Blue, — Component of Leitch's Blue 137

Prussian Brown 153

Prussian Green 153

Pure Scarlet (See Scarlet)

Purple Lake 154

Purple Madder 154

Purple Ultramarine 165

Purple, Indian 130

Quercitron Lake (Brown Pink) 97

Quicksilver Vermilion, Use of, — In Clearing Shellac Var-
nishes 72

Raw Sienna 154

Raw Umber 155

Permanent Painting

Page

Red Alizarin Colors 85

Red Lead (See Minium)

Red Lead (Scarlet Red) 158

Red Lead, Bleaching of 181

Refined Linseed Oil 76

Red Oxides Used by the Ancients 23, 26

Red, Chrome 109

Red, Indian 131

Red, Light 137

Red, Madder (See Madder Lake)

Red, Mars 141

Red, Venetian 167

Red, Ultramarine, Discovery of, — by Leykauf 165

Rembrandt, Colors Used by 28

Rembrandt, Treatment of Flesh Tints by 86

Rembrandt's Madder 156

Remedies for Bracking of Paintings 40

Renovation of Paintings 56

Renovation of Paintings Yellow with Age 6l

Resin Color ( Gamboge) 125

Resin, Fossil; Color and Utilization of 36

Reynolds (Sir Joshua), and Secret of the Old Masters. 28

Reynolds (Sir Joshua), Failure of the Paintings of 188

Roman Ochre 156

Roman Ochre, Cool 157

Roman Sepia (See Sepia)

Rose Doree 157

Rose Lake 157

Rose Madder (See Madder Lake)

Rough Stuff for Surfacing 49

Royal Blue (Cobalt Blue) 112

Rubens, Colors- Used by 28

Rubens Madder 156

Rubia Tinctorium (See Red Alizarin Colors)

Russ (Lampblack), Earliest * 24

Rye-Bread Ball for Cleaning 60

Sandarac, Earliest Use of 13, 14

Sandarac Varnish 71

Sap Green 157

Scarlet Lake 159

Scarlet Madder (See Madder Lake)
Scarlet Vermilion (See Orange Vermilion)

Permanent Painting

Page
School White (See Flake White)

School of Impressionism 64

Secret of the Masters', Search for 28

Sepia 159

Sepia, Warm 170

Shellac Varnish 71, 72

Sienna, Burnt 99

Sienna, Extract of (See Mars Orange)
Sienna, Extract of Raw (See Mars Yellow)

Sienna, Raw 154

Sienna, Effect of Acid Gases on 182

Silica (Silex) in Ultramarine Blue 164, 165

Silver White 160

Sinopia Used by the Ancients 23, 25

Sinopia 28

Sky Blue 160

Slow Drying Colors 187

Smalt 160

Soap for Cleaning Paintings 56

Solvents for Removing Old Varnish 57

Spirits of Turpentine (See Turpentine)

Spirit Varnish 71

Steel Blue (See Chinese Blue and Prussian Blue)
Sulphate of Barium (See Constant White)
Sulphide of Arsenic (See King's Yellow)
Sulphide of Cadmium (See Cadmium Yellow)
Sulphide of Mercury (See Chinese Vermilion)

Sulphur Dioxide in Air 180

Sulphur Fumes, Discoloration Caused by, — and its Removal 61

Sunlight, Drying Effects of 74

Sunlight, Bleaching Effects of 61

Synopia (See Sinopia)

Sizing Coats for Canvas 53

Tempera Painting, Mediums Used for 9

Tempera Paintings, Cleaning of 56

Terpinol Solvent 57

Terre Verte 161

Terre Verte (Veronese Green) 123

Terre Rose 161

Tints, Monochrome 143

"Tooth" Desirable in Ground Coats 117, 124

Tours Orange Mineral 161

Permanent Painting

Page

Tours Red 161

Transparent Gold Ochre 162

Turpentine 69

Turpentine, Cleaning Pictures with 56

Turpentine as Varnish Remover 58

Turpentine, its Utility in Renovating Paintings 61, 62

Tuscan Red 162

Ultramarine Ash 166

Ultramarine Blue 163

Ultramarine Blue, Action with Other Pigments 112

Ultramarine Blue, Effect of Acids on 121

Ultramarine Blue, Effect of ,— on White Lead 79

Ultramarine Blue, Composition of 165

Ultramarine Blue with Prussian Blue 137

Ultramarine Blue, Silica Content of 164, 165

Ultramarine Blue, Brilliant 94

Ultramarine Blue, French 122

Ultramarine, Genuine (See Ultramarine Blue)

Ultramarine, Purple *. 165

Umber, Burnt 100

Umber, Raw 155

Unequal Expansion of Paint Films . . . , 50

Vandyke Brown 166

Vandyke Brown (Cappah Brown) 103

Vandyke Brown (Cologne Earth) 114

Vandyke Madder 167

Van Eycks, Medium Used by the 39

Van Eyck, Hubert and Jan, Painting in Oil by n, 21

Varnish, Amber 73

Varnish Known to the Ancients 13, 16

Varnish as a Protective Coating 62

Varnish, Disintegrated, Removal of 58

Venetian Red 167

Verdigris 168

Vermilion, Chinese 108

Vermilion, Extract of 1 19

Vermilion, Field's Orange 120

Vermilion Substitutes 162

Verona Brown 169

Veronese Green 169

Veronese, Paul, Green Used by 123

Verte de Grece 23

Permanent Painting

Page

Vibert 34

Vibert, Medium Used by 69

Vienna Blue (See Cobalt Blue)
Vine Black (See Blue Black)

Violet Carmine 169

Violet, Permanent 149

Violet Ultramarine 150

Viridian 170

Volatile Solvents 69

Walnut Oil 76

Walnut Oil, Early Knowledge of n

Warm Sepia 170

Warping of Wooden Panels 54

Water in Tube Colors 184

White Pigments Used by the Ancients 26

White Lead (Cremnitz White) 116

White Lead (Flake White) 120

White Lead (Foundation White ) 124

White Lead, Ancient Use o£ 15, 22

Wood Alcohol for Cleaning Paintings 56, 58

Wood as Foundation 48

Wood Lake (Purple Lake) 154

Wood Panels, Warping of 54

Wool as Foundation 182

Xantophyll 125

Yellow, Alizarin 87

Yellow, Cadmium 101

Yellow, Citron no

Yellow, King's 135

Yellow Lake 171

Yellow, Lemon 137

Yellow Ochre 171

Yellow, Permanent 150

Yellow, Primrose 151

Yellow Sienna (See Raw Sienna)

Yolk of Egg Used as a Medium 14

Zinc (Metal Sheet) as Foundation 43

Zinc Oxide (Chinese White) 108

Zinc White 172

Zinc White, Drying of, — in Oil 75

Zinc Yellow (See Primrose Yellow)

Zinnobar Green 173

STANDARD WORKS

ON

l£, Colors?, anti

ANDES, L. E. Drying Oils, Boiled Oil, and Solid and Liquid

Driers: A practical work for manufacturers of Oils, Var-
nishes, Printing Inks, Oil-cloth and Linoleum, Oil-cakes,
Paints, etc. 8vo, cloth, illustrated net, $5.00.

Iron Corrosion, Anti-fouling and Anti-corrosive Paints.

Translated from the German by Charles Salter. Illus-
trated with engravings and half-tone cuts. 8vo., cloth,
illustrated net, $4.00.

Oil Colors and Printing Inks: A practical hand-book

treating of Linseed Oil, Boiled Oil, Paints, Artists' Colors,
Lampblack, Printers' Ink (Black and Colored). Trans-
lated from the German by A. Morris and H. Robson,
B. Sc. With 56 illustrations. 8vo, cloth, illustrated, 215

BANNON, JOHN. Linseed Oil Manufacture and Treatment.

Varnish Manufacture. Superior, Medium, and Cheap
Grades. A Practical Manual. i2mo, cloth. . .net, $5.00.

BERSCH, JOSEF. The Manufacture of Mineral and Lake ,/

Pigments. Containing Directions for the Manufacture
of all Artificial, Artists' and Painters' Colors, Enamel,
Soot, and Metallic Pigments. A text-book for Manu-
facturers, Merchants, Artists, and Painters. Translated
from the second revised edition by Arthur C. Wright,
B. Sc. 8vo, cloth, illustrated net, $5.00.

BITMEAD, RICHARD. French Polishing and Enameling:
A practical work of Instruction, including Recipes for
making Polishes, Varnishes, Glaze-Lacquers, Revivers, etc.
i2mo, cloth net, $.60

STANDARD WORKS ON

BRANNT, WM. T. The Painter, Gilder, and Varnishers'
Companion. Comprising the manufacture and test of
pigments, the art of painting, graining, marbling, staining,
sign writing, varnishing, glass staining, and gilding on
glass; together with coach painting and varnishing, and
the principles of the harmony and contrast of colors.
Twenty-seventh edition, revised, enlarged, and in great part
rewritten. i2mo, cloth, illustrated net, $1.50

Varnishes, Lacquers, Printing Inks, and Sealing Waxes;

their Raw Materials and their Manufacture, to which is
added the Art of Varnishing and Lacquering, including
\/ the preparation of Putties and Stains for Wood, Ivory,
Bone, Horn, and Leather. i2mo, cloth, with 39 illustra-
tions net, $3.00

BROWN, WM. N. House Decorating and Painting. With

numerous illustrations. i2mo, cloth net, $1.50

Workshop Wrinkles for Decorators, Painters, Paper-
Hangers, and Others. 8vo, cloth net, $1.00

The Art of Enameling on Metal. With figures and

illustrations. i2mo, cloth, illustrated net, $1.00

CHURCH, A. H. Chemistry of Paints and Painting. Third
edition, revised and enlarged. 8vo, cloth net, $3.00

CLARK, R. INGAM. A Few Notes on Varnishes and Fossil
Resins-; 4to, cloth, illustrated net, $3.25

COWELL, W. B. Pure Air, Ozone, and Water: a practical
treatise of their utilization and value in oil, grease, soap,
paint, glue, and other industries. With tables and figures,
i2mo, cloth, illustrated net, $2.00

j DENNING, DAVID. Polishes and Stains for Woods; how to
V use and prepare them. Being a complete guide to polish-
ing woodwork, with directions for staining, and full infor-
mation for making the stains, polishes, etc., in the simplest
and most satisfactory manner. i2mo, paper net, $.40

DESAINT, A. Three Hundred Shades and How to Mix

Them. 100 folding plates. Cloth net, $10.00

ELLIS, GEO. H. White Paint Analysis: A Collection of

Notes on the Chemical Analysis of White and Tinted
Paints, with detailed and practical methods given for the
analysis of Mixed Paints. A useful book for the Chemist
and Paint Manufacturer. 8vo, cloth, illustrated, net, $1.50

ENNIS, WILLIAM D. Linseed Oil and Other Seed Oils.

An industrial manual. 88 illustrations, 8vo, cloth. 330
pp net, $4.00

PAINTS, OILS, VARNISHES

FAERIE, JAMES, F.G.S. — Notes on Lead Ores; their Dis-
tribution and Properties. i2mo, cloth net, $1.00

FURNELL, J. Students' Handbook of Paints, Colors, Oils, ./

and Varnishes. 8vo, cloth, illustrated, 96 pp. ..net, $1.00

HALL, C. H. Chemistry of Faults and Paint Vehicles.

Illustrated. i2mo, cloth, 133 pp net, $2.00

HATT, J. A. H. The Colorist. Designed to Correct the

commonly held theory that red, yellow, and blue are the
primary colors, and to supply the much-needed easy
method of determining color harmony; together with a
system of color nomenclature and other practical infor-
mation for artists and workers or designers in colors.
2 color plates, 8vo, cloth, 95 pp net, $1.50

HERMANN, F. Painting on Glass and Porcelain and

Enamel Painting. On the basis of Personal Practical
Experience of the Condition of the Art up to date. Trans-
lated by Charles Salter. Second greatly enlarged edition.
8vo, cloth, illustrated net, $3.50

HOFF, J. N. Paint and Varnish Facts and Formulas. A

hand-book for the maker, dealer, and user of paints and
varnishes. Containing over 600 recipes. 8vo, cloth, 179
pp net, $1.50

HURST, GEORGE H. Painters' Laboratory Guide: A i
Hand-book on Paints, Colors, and Varnishes for Students. Jl
With diagrams and figures. 8vo, cloth, illustrated, 248
PP net, $1.75

Dictionary of Chemicals and Raw Products used hi the

Manufacture of Paints, Colors, Varnishes, and Allied
Preparations. 8vo, cloth net, $3.00

Painters' Colours Oils, and Varnishes : A Practical Man-
ual. Third edition, revised and enlarged. Profusely illus-
trated, with copious index. 8vo, cloth net, $3.50

Color: A Hand-book of the Theory of Color; a practical

work for the Artist, Art Student, Painter, Dyer, and
Calico Printer, and others. Illustrated with 10 colored
plates and 72 illustrations. Svo, cloth net, $2.50

JAMESON, LEWIS. The Manufacturers' Practical up-to-
date Recipe Book. Nearly 3,000 practical up-to-date
recipes for manufacturing all kinds and qualities of colors,
paints, varnishes, japans, enamels, oils, greases, lubri-
cants, soaps, etc., and for all manufactures connected
with the allied trades. Buyers' and sellers' simple and

STANDARD WORKS ON

reliable tests for materials, adulterations, etc. 8vo,

cloth. 4 volumes, each net, $15.00

Vols, I., II., III., pertaining to Paints, Oils, etc., as follows:
Contents: Vol. I., 569 pp. Pigments and Dry Colours,
Paste and Mixed Paints, Paint Oils, Vehicles, and Medi-
ums, Distempers, and Sundry Paint Materials. — Vol. II.,
412 pp. Varnishes and Varnish Derivatives, Oils and
other Varnish Materials, Oil and Spirit Varnishes, Print-
ing and Litho Inks, Enamels, Anti-Foulings, Gold Paints,
etc> — Vol. III., 477 pp. Oils, Fats, Tallows, Waxes and
Greases (Vegetable, Animal, and Mineral), for Burning,
Lubricating, Leather Dressing, etc., and for all purposes.

JENNINGS, A. S. Paint and Color Mixing: A Practical
Hand-book for Painters, Decorators, and all who have to
mix colors. Containing seventy-two samples of paint of
various colors, including the principal graining grounds
and upwards of four hundred different color mixtures,
with hints on color and paint mixing generally, testing
colors, recipes for special paints, etc. 8vo, cloth, illustrated,

Commercial Paints and Painting. 8vo, cloth (Van Nos-

trand's Westminster Series) In Press

JENNISON, FRANCIS H. The Manufacture of Lake Pig-
ments, from Artificial Colours: A useful handbook for
colour manufacturers, dyers, colour chemists, paint manu-
facturers, drysalters, wall-paper makers, enamel and sur-
face-paper makers. With fifteen plates illustrating the
various methods and errors that arise in the different pro-
cesses of production. 8vo, cloth, illustrated . . .net, $3.00

JONES, M. W. The Testing and Valuation of Raw Materials
used in Paint and Color Manufacture. i2mo, cloth

LAMBERT, THOMAS. Lead and its Compounds. With
tables, diagrams, and folding plates. 8vo, cloth, illus-
trated, 228 pp net, $3.50

LIVACHE, ACH. The Manufacture of Varnishes and Kin-
dred Industries. Describing the Manufacture and Chem-
ical and Physical Properties of Spirit Varnishes; and Oil
Varnishes; Raw Materials; Resins; Solvents and Color-
ing Principles; Drying Oils, their Extraction, Properties,
and Applications; Oil Refining and Boiling; the Manu-
facture, Employment and Testing of Various Varnishes.
Translated from the French by John Geddes Mclntosh.
Second Edition greatly extended and adapted to English

PAINTS, OILS, VARNISHES

practice, with numerous original recipes, by the translator.
Vol. I. Oil Crushing, Refining, and Boiling; the Manu-
facture of Linoleum, Printing and Lithographic Inks, and
India Rubber Substitutes. Illustrated, 8vo, cloth, 150 pp.

Vol. II. Varnish Materials and Oil Varnish Making.

Illustrated, 8vo, cloth, 209 pp net, $4.00

(To be complete in three volumes.)

/ MUCKLEY, W. J. A Hand-book for Painters and Art

7 Students on the Character, Nature, and Use of Colors.
Fourth edition. 8vo, cloth net, $1.60

Oilmen's Sundries, and how to Make them: Being a collec-

» f tion of Practical Recipes for Blacking, Boot Creams and

v Polishes, Harness Oils, Pastes and Polishes, Leather

Dressing and Renovators, Starch Glazes, Blues, Stove

Pastes, Starch Tints, Straw-Hat Polishes, Metal and

Plate Polishes, Furniture Creams, Wood Fillers, Floor

Waxes and Finishes, Inks, Pastes, Glues, and Gums,

Blackboard Slating, Disinfectants, Cloudy Ammonia,

Insecticides, Hearth-stone Squares, etc. i2mo, cloth

PARRY, E. J., and COSTE, J. H. Chemistry of Pigments.

With tables and figures. 8vo, cloth, illustrated, 280 pp.

PATERSON, DAVID. The Science of Colour Mixing: A

manual intended for the use of Dyers, Calico Printers,
and Colour Chemists. With figures, tables, and coloured
plates. 8vo, cloth, illustrated net, $3.00

PETIT, G. The Manufacture and Comparative Merits of
White Lead and Zinc White Paints. Translated from the
French by Donald Grant. i2mo, cloth, 95 pp. . .net, $1.50

PULSIFER, W. H. Notes for a History of Lead, and an

Inquiry into the Development of the Manufacture of
White Lead and Lead Oxides. 8vo, cloth net, $4.00

RANAUD, PAUL. Enamels and Enamelling: an introduc-
tion to the preparation and application of all kinds of
enamels for technical and artistic purposes. For enamel
makers, workers in gold and silver, and manufacturers of
objects of art. Third German edition, translated by
Charles Salter. With figures, diagrams, and tables.
8vo, cloth, illustrated net, $4.00

Recipes for the Color, Paint, Varnish, Oil, Soap, and Dry-
saltery Trade. Compiled by an Analytical Chemist.
Svo, 347 pp., cloth net, $3.50

STANDARD WORKS

RIFFAULT: A Practical Treatise on the Manufacture of

Colors for Painting. By MM. Riffault, Vergnaud, and
Toussaint. Revised by M. F. Malepeyre, and translated
from the French by A. A. Fesquet. 8vo, cloth, illus-
trated net, $5.00

SCHWEIZER, V. Distillation of Resins, Resinate Lakes,
and Pigments; Carbon Pigments and Pigments for Type-
writing Machines, Manifolders, etc. A description of
the proper methods of distilling resin-oils, the manufac-
ture of resinates, resin-varnishes, resin-pigments, and
enamel paints, the preparation of all kinds of carbon pig-
ments, and printers' ink, lithographic inks and chalks, and
also inks for typewriters, manifolders, and rubber stamps,
With tables and 68 figures and diagrams. 8vo, cloth,
illustrated. 183 pp net, $3.50

SMITH, J. C. Manufacture of Paint. A Practical Hand-
book for Paint Manufacturers, Merchants, and Painters.
/ With 60 illus. and one large diagram. 8vo, cloth, net, $3.00
>SSTANDAGE, H. C. The Artists' Manual of Pigments.
^ Showing their Composition, Conditions of Permanency,
Non-Permanency, and Adulterations; effects in Combi-
nation with each other and with vehicles; and the most
Reliable Tests of Purity. Third edition. i2mo, cloth.

SUFFLING, E. R. Treatise on the Art of Glass Painting.
Prefaced with a Review of Ancient Glass. With engra-
vings and colored plates. 8vo, cloth net, $3.50

TERRY, G. Pigments, Paints, and Painting. A Practical
Book for Practical Men. i2mo, cloth, illustrated.

TOCH, M. Chemistry and Technology of Mixed Paints.
58 illustrations. 8vo, cloth, 166 pp net, $3.00

Materials for Permanent Painting; a manual for

manufacturers, art dealers, artists, and collectors.
With full page illustrations. I2mo, cloth, 208
pages net, $2.00

WRIGHT, A. C. Simple Methods for Testing Painters'
Materials. 8vo, cloth, ioo pp net, $2.50

D. VAN NOSTRAND COMPANY,

Publishers and Booksellers,
23 MURRAY & 27 WARREN STS., NEW YORK.

SEND FOR OUR COMPLETE CATALOGS,

RECENTLY PUBLISHED-

8vo, Cloth, 166 pp., Illustrated. Price, $3.00 Net.

THE

CHEMISTRY— TECHNOLOGY

V/ OF-

MIXED PAINTS

BY

MAXIMILIAN TOCH

With Photo-micrographs and Engravings.
CONTENTS.

Preface. Introduction. Mixed Paints. The Manufacture of
Mixed Paints. The White Pigments. White Lead. Zinc Oxide.
Lithopone. Sulphate of Lead. Sublimed White Lead. The Oxides
of Lead. Red Lead. Orange Mineral. Litharge The Inert Fil-
lers and Extenders. Silica. Infusorial Earth— Silex. Barytes.
Barium Sulphate — Blanc Fixe. Gypsum — Calcium Carbonates.
China Clay — Kaolin. The Red Pigments. Venetian Reds. Indian-
Red. Permanent Vermillion. Burnt Ochre. — American Sienna.
The Black Pigments. Coal. Charcoal. Graphite. Mineral Black.
Carnon Black. Lamp Black. Bone Black. Chrome Yellow.
Chrome Green. Chromium Oxide. Prussian Blue. Ultramarine
and Cobalt Blue. Linseed Oil China Wood Oil. Dryers. Ben-
zine. Benzol Turpentine. Fish Oil. Combining Mediums. Water
in the Composition of Mixed Paints. Floor Paints. Cement Paint-
Damp Resisting Paints. The Analysis of Paints. The Analysis,
of White Paints. The Analysis of Oils in Paints. The Influence
of Paint on Malted Liquors. The Microscope. The Spectroscope.
Index

D. VAN NOSTRAND COMPANY,

Publishers and Booksellers,

23 Hurray and 27 Warren Streets, NEW YORK.

RECENTLY PUBLISHED.

I2MO. CLOTH. 115 Pages. Price $2.00 Net

THE CHEMISTRY

OF-

PAINT AND PAINT VEHICLES.

BY CLARE H. HALL, B. S.

EXTRACT FROM PREFACE.

•' In writing this book, the author has attempted to sift from the great mass
of analytical chemistry, those methods which apply particularly to the analysis of
paints, at the same time calling attention to the most important physical
characteristics of the raw materials.

No chemist can be proficient in the analysis of paints, without a thorough
knowledge of all the materials with which he comes in contact.

This book, being written from the standpoint of a chemist, employed in the
manufacture of paints and colors, Chapter IV has been included in an atteinpt to
bridge the space between the laboratory and the factory. It is here that so often
the results of previous analysis are rendered worthless by being placed in the
hands of one who does not understand their interpretation nor the composition of
the raw materials which he is using. Over this work the chemist should haw-
final supervision."

CONTENTS.
Chap. I. The Determination of the Elementary Constituents

of Paints.
II. Raw Materials, Properties, Tests and Methods of

Analysis.
HI. The Analysis of Dry Colors, Pastes and Liquid

Paints.

IV. Matching of Samples.
V. Paint Vehicles.
Appendix

D. VAN NOSTRAND COMPANY,

Publishers and Booksellers,

23 MURRAY AND 27 WARREN STREETS. NEW YORK.

OCT I 7 iy/5

UNIV. OF LUF., BERK.

' u i i £ f
