UC-NRLF

TEACHING OF DRAWING

I. H. MORRIS, Art Master

AUTHOR OF
'GEOMETRICAL DRAWING* AND 'PRACTICAL PLANE AND SOLID GEOMETRY

THIRD EDITION

LONGMANS, GREEN, AND CO.

AND NEW YORK : 15 EAST 16th STREET

Ail rights reservzd

PREFACE

The object of this manual is to provide a fairly complete
course of methodical teaching in drawing, as required in Ele-
mentary schools by the Department of Science and Art. It is
universally admitted by all who have either to supervise or to
examine the work done in schools, that there is abundant room
for improvement in the method of teaching this important
subject.

The methods, hints, and suggestions given, are the outcome
of an extensive practical experience in Elementary Schools,
Art Night Classes, and Schools of Art ; and although doubtless
familiar to some, the author ventures to hope that they will be
of material assistance to many who may not have had the
opportunity of receiving a special training in drawing.

The book contains about 700 illustrations, which have
been specially drawn for the purpose. The Freehand examples,
which are mostly shown in stages, may be divided into three
sections, viz., Conventional Ornament, Plant Forms, and
Common Objects. Many are original drawings, others are
based upon examples from the Illustrated Syllabus, Dyce's
Drawing Book, Examination Tests, Casts of Ornament, &c.
They are selected to illustrate definite principles which the
teacher may readily apply to other figures. Considerable space
is devoted to the teaching of Scale Drawing, Model Drawing,

iv The Teaching of Drazving

and Solid Geometry, as these parts of the subject require the
most skilful and intelligent teaching.

Especial attention is directed to the large number of speci-
men lessons. These are given chiefly with a view of affording
assistance to young teachers and those who may not have had
much practical acquaintance with the subject.

I. H. M.

Sheffield : August 1893.

CONTENTS

CHAPTER I

INTRODUCTION

PAGE
I

CHAPTER II

INFANT SCHOOLS

Code requirements .

Apparatus .

Use of Crayons.

Upright Lines ,

Level Lines

Combinations of

Upright

and Level. Lines

Prets .

lO

Objects composed of Up-
right and Level Lines

Slanting Lines and Pat-
terns composed OF
Upright, Level, and
Slanting Lines .

Objects .....

CHAPTER III

STANDARD 1

Syllabus and Apparatus .
Introductory Lesson
Method of using Pencil

and Ruler .
Lesson. Horizontal Lines
Vertical, Oblique, and

Parallel Lines .
Arrangement of the

Drawing ....
Angles ....

Lesson. The Square

Dictated Drawing. Dia-

meters and Diagonals

Lines intersecting at

Right Angles
Bisection and Trtsection

of the Eight Angle.

Examples ....

Memory Drawing

VI

The Teaching of Drawing

CHAPTER IV

STANDARD II

PAGE

Syllabus and Apparatus 43
Ruler work. Parallels 45
Perpendiculars . . 46

Curves and Common Ob-
jects .... 48

CHAPTER V

OF

Syllabus .
Freehand Drawing
Curved Figures

,, First Stage

,, Second Stage

,, Third Stage

,, Lesson
Examples .

Freehand Drawing i
Right-lined Forms

STANDARD III

Drawing of Geometrical

F

Figures with Rulers 68

Lesson

Examples .

7i

Triangles .

Zigzags

The Hexagon

F

Lesson

The Octagon

The Pentagon

CHAPTER VI

FREEHAND DRAWING. STANDARDS IV-VII

Lesson

Examples. Standard IV

V

Method of drawing

Vases ....

Examples. Standard VI 116

VII 128

CHAPTER VII

SCALE DRAWING.

Syllabus and Apparatus
Introductory Lesson
Construction of Scales.
Lesson ....
Examples ....
Drawing to Scale on
Plain Paper

STANDARD

IV

Drawing

ON

Squared

Paper .

Enlarging

OR

Reducing

A GIVEN

Fig

ure.

Lesson

Tests .

Contents

vu

CHAPTER VIII

PLANE GEOMETRY. STANDARDS V AND VII

PAGE

PAGE

Syllabus and Apparatus.

Tests .

Standard V

Syllabus.

Standard VII 166

Lesson ....

Tests .

Examples ....

CHAPTER IX

SOLID GEOMETRY. STANDARDS VI AND VU

Syllabus and Apparatus.

PENDICULAR NOR

Standard VI

Parallel to the V.P.

How to make Models .

Plane Figures

Plan and Elevation

Sections ....

Solids Standing on a

Tests

Face ....

Syllabus. Standard VII

Lesson I .

Easy positions of the

Lesson II .

Circle, Cylinder, and

Lesson III ...

Cone ....

Solids Standing on an

The Circle

Edge ....

The Cylinder and Cone .

I. Edge Perpendicular to

Sections. The Sphere .

the V.P. .

,, The Cylinder

II. Edge Parallel to the

,, The Cone

V.P

Tests

III. Edge neither Per-

CHAPTER X

MODEL DRAWING. STANDARDS V AND VI

Syllabus. Standard V . 208
Introductory Lessons 209 211
Arrangement of the

Models . . .212
The Cube. First Lesson . 212

,, Second Lesson 214

,, Third Lesson. 215

Common Errors . .215
The Square Prism, Frame,

Box, Slate and Book 216

The Cylinder, Axis ver
tical. First Lesson
,, Axis hori

zontal. Lesson

The Cone .

The Box, Open Book, Cy
linder and board,
Cone and Slate, Jar,
Jugs, Gallon Bottle,
Roller, Saucepan

Vlll

The Teaching of Drawing

The Hexagonal Prism.
Axis vertical. Les-

PAGE

The Cylindrical Ring . 236

sons .... 229 j Syllabus. Standard VI . 242

,, Axis horizontal 231 Groups and Common Ob-

The Triangular Prism, jects .... 242

Pyramids . . . 234 '

CHAPTER XI

LIGHT AND SHADE. STANDARD VII

Syllabus .... 248

Materials. . . . 248

First Lesson . . . 249

Second ,, The Cube . 251

The Cylinder . . . 254

The Vase ....
Shading from Casts
Method of Shading the
Cast ....

CHAPTER XII

THE ELEMENTARY DRAWING CERTIFICATE

Requirements for First

Class Certificate . 262

Requirements for Second

Class Certificate . 262

Elementary Stage Free-

Elementary Stage Model 263
Elementary Stage of

Shading from Casts. 266
Elementary Stage of
Practical Plane and
Solid Geometry . 267

THE

TEACHING OF DRAWING

CHAPTER I

INTRODUCTION

Now that Drawing is practically compulsory ' for boys in schools
for older scholars,' as a condition of earning the annual grants,
it is absolutely necessary that it should be taught intelligently,
systematically, and thoroughly. By intelligent teaching is
meant the training of the eye to see, the mind to think, and the
hand to carry out the representation of the forms seen, or the
conceptions formed in the mind. Drawing taken without
method is neither useful nor interesting to the pupil, whereas
when well taught it is the most pleasurable and fascinating sub-
ject taught in our schools, providing, as it does, a complete
change from the ordinary routine of school work, and calling
into exercise faculties which otherwise would not be properly
developed.

It is now a well-established fact, based upon actual experi-
ence, that with very few exceptions all children may be taught
to draw. They will not all arrive at the same pitch of efficiency-
some can only crawl while others walk or even run. The ad-
vantages of a training in drawing from an educational point of
view alone are quite sufficient to justify its position as a most
important branch of school work. The powers of the eye, the
hand, and the mind are all more fully developed ; habits of

i B

2 ,,, , The TeacJiing of Drawing

neatness and' careful' observation are formed, ability to perceive
anda^rfet^aie.b^aO^ojf forni is cultivated, and the imaginative
and inventive' faculties are 'all' fostered and increased. In addi-
tion to these points, we may mention its great importance in
connection with industrial and commercial pursuits. It is the
one part of technical education that can be well and easily done
in ordinary schools.

To secure success the teacher must be enthusiastic in the
work, and continually adding to his or her own store of art
knowledge, or the work will become mechanical and uninterest-
ing. Collective teaching from the blackboard will do more
than anything else to stimulate the teacher's energy, and as
large copies are now chiefly used for testing the work done, and
the necessities of schools require large numbers to be taught
simultaneously, it has now become imperative that the same
methods so successfully used in teaching other subjects should
be applied to drawing. The old plan of giving out copies and
the teacher going round to each pupil individually, is rapidly
and deservedly becoming a thing of the past. The advantages
of blackboard teaching are so obvious that they scarcely need
repetition : the great saving in teaching all the class the same
thing at the same time, the ease with which errors can be
pointed out and difficulties illustrated, the demonstration of
proper methods of procedure, the stating of the reasons for
the various steps taken, and the fact that the pupil is encour-
aged to try and imitate what he sees the teacher doing, are
reasons quite sufficient to justify its adoption. The teacher is
also enabled to more effectively supervise the work done, and
can grade his lessons so that one naturally follows from the
principles last taught.

I would here point out that it is not at all necessary that
the teacher of drawing in an elementary school should be an
artist : extensive practical experience has clearly shown that
the ordinary teachers of the school, even when not possessed
of much artistic ability, can by preparation and careful atten-
tion to good methods produce excellent results in the element-
ary work.

CHAPTER II

INFANT SCHOOLS

Drawing in infant schools is somewhat beyond the scope of
this book, which is written more with a view of dealing with the
teaching of drawing as required in schools for older scholars by
the Science and Art Department, and which the teachers must
necessarily thoroughly master to meet the requirements and
earn the grants. This money payment hampers and restricts
in many ways, by confining all to one hard and fast line. Many
would like to vary the course or introduce fresh matter, but
there is not time to do both, and to earn the payments it is
necessary to keep to the beaten track.

In infant schools this is not the case to so great an extent,
the teacher having a little more freedom of choice. The Code
now offers a grant of one shilling on the average attendance of
the boys if drawing be satisfactorily taught, and as drawing is
now obligatory for boys in schools for older scholars, it certainly
appears more rational that the infant boys should draw instead
of practising needlework. In circular 291 to H. M. Inspectors
the Education Department states, ' That drawing may be taught
to boys in infant schools on the lines of the Froebel system. Slates
ruled with crossed lines, making squares a quarter of an inch
wide, should be used, and on them the children should be made to
draw perpendicular, horizontal, and diagonal lines.

' Interest may be given to the exercise by making figures or pat-
terns out of the combinations developed in this practice ; but the
mam object of the teaching should be the training of the hand to
execute with nicety and precision, and the eye to discern degrees of
variation in the straight lines from the perpendicular or hori-

b 2

4 The Teaching of Drawing

zontal, and to compare and judge the relative lengths of the lines
and the angles made by their junction?

Article 98/; of the new Code prescribes simple geometrical
drawing as one of the employments which best satisfy the
third of the requirements necessary to obtain the highest
grant.

Drawing can be readily carried out without much additional
expense : the children simply require chequered slates ruled in
squares about a quarter of an inch wide, and the teacher a black-
board ruled with red lines forming squares two inches in width.
Red lines are preferable to white, as the chalk marks can be more
easily distinguished. Cards and copies are only necessary for
the use of the teacher, and those should be selected which
show patterns and representations of objects treated in the
flat — that is, showing only length and breadth. Copies showing
thickness should not be taken, as infants are quite incapable
either of understanding or representing these successfully.

There are numerous Kindergarten books and cards
published from which the teacher may select the material for
the lessons, which may also be made a powerful aid in teaching
number and imparting general information.

In the following suggestive course, the patterns are largely
based upon the Department's circular, as there is plenty of
instructive and interesting matter embodied in the three posi-
tions of lines, upright, level, and slanting, and the great variety
of combinations that may be made from them.

Endless and wearisome repetition of lines in any particular
position should be avoided, as the child will probably draw the
second line quite as accurately as the twentieth. The lines
may also be varied in length and symmetrically arranged so
as to form a simple pattern from the beginning, thus adding
variety and interest to the lesson as well as training the eye in
habits of observation. The examples given are not intended
to be exhaustive, but merely indicative of the method of proce-
dure. A few suggestive questions and hints are here and there
given as a guide to young teachers.

The children should be taught to draw the lines from top
to bottom, and from left to right. In beginning a copy, the

Infant Schools 5

teacher should mark the position of one of the left hand
corners by a small dot on the board ; this should be repeated
on the slates by the pupils. The number of squares required
for the line should be counted and a small dot made to
indicate the end of the line. The two dots should now be
joined. This method should be followed throughout, as the
pupils work more accurately and systematically by this means.

As the children advance to the drawing of simple patterns,
portions of the copy may be emphasised by shading, as shown
in figs. 49, 50, &c. This adds to the appearance of the draw-
ing, and is valuable as a means of directing attention to the
shapes of the spaces. As further progress is made, crayons or
coloured chalks may be used. For example, if the shaded
spaces in figs. 49, 50, &c, are suitably coloured, a great charm
is added to the work. In other copies, two colours might be
used, thus producing a very pleasing effect.

6 The Teaching of Drawing

Upright Lines

Question on the kind of line. ' Straight.' ' Upright.' Illus-
trate what ' upright ' means by a piece of string with a weight
attached. Elicit plenty of examples, and take the walls as
a basis. Explain use of plumb line in building a wall. Why

must the wall be upright ? Illustrate with a pile of books or
wooden bricks, showing that they will fall if not upright.
What are the walls made of? What is the man called who
builds with bricks, &c. ? How long is the first line ? How
many of the first make one of the third ? How many lines are
there ? How many are of the same length ? &c.

Infant Schools

Level Lines

Proceed in a similar manner to that suggested in dealing
with upright lines.

Take the floor as the object of comparison. Elicit the
various parts of the room and furniture that are level.

Show with a glass of water that the surface of the water is
always level, while the surfaces of solids will remain in whatever
position the object may be placed.

Recapitulate the facts concerning upright and level lines,
and give plenty of illustrations.

The TeacJiing of Drawing

Combinations of Upright and Level Lines

How many upright lines in fig. 10 ? How many level ones ?
How many lines altogether ? What is the figure ? What do
we call the point where two sides meet ? How many corners

i

are there? Are they all alike? Elicit plenty of illustrations
showing how common this corner is. Show that there are
corners of different sizes, and let the children test whether the
corners are right angles, by fitting in a book or a slate. Explain
why fig. 1 1 is not a square, and draw it in different positions.

Infant Schools

m

The Teaching of Drawing

Fret patterns afford a great variety of pleasing exercises,
and give excellent practice in cultivating habits of observation
and accuracy.

Plenty of illustrations showing the use of this ornament in

W

i

i

i

V

_i

j

I

i

i

S

the decoration of borders of oilcloths, carpets, wall-papers, &c,
can be easily shown, thus adding interest to the lesson.

The numbers placed beside the lines show the order in
which they should be drawn. To make this perfectly clear,
fig. 19 is shown in its three, and fig. 20 in its five, separate
stages of development. Each of these steps marks a stage

Infant Schools

II

i

The Teaching of Drawing

when the slates should be examined, and forms a complete
copy in itself, increasing in difficulty towards the last. The

i

y/k

i

m

i

children also are being unconsciously trained in the proper
method of building up a pattern.

The various objects should all be explained and questioned
upon for a few minutes j for example in fig. 29, after ascertain-

Infant Schools

ing what object is represented, these other points might be
noticed : — What are the palings made of ? How many are there?
How are they held up ? What do they stand upon ? What
colour are the bricks ? What else are bricks used for? What

i

3d

T~

is the man called who builds the wall ? How does he get
the wall upright ? What sort of lines do the rows of bricks
make ? &c. These are merely suggestions as to the manner
in which interest may be aroused and the general intelligence of
the class increased.

H

The Teaching of Drai

ving

i "
I

i f

i

i

t

P9

i

1 i

ta

1 i

X i I

tj

i

J

L. ^Ti

Infant Schools

How many sides has the window in fig. 31 ? What is the
window fixed in ? What is the frame made of ? What is the

W

! i

window for ? Why is glass used ? Why would not wood do ?
Question on the number of panes, position of the lines, shape
of the corners, &c.

The Teaching of Drawing

Slanting Lines

These are more difficult to draw, and at first should only be
short. They greatly increase the variety of the patterns and
the skill of the children, as they are now compelled to do with-

Z7ZZZZ SSS SL3_S_t

/k/\/VV ZWVS

N Z N Z \ Z

1 ts

Z\ /\ A A t A A /

t

VA . „H J 1 -1 N^ZS^Z+N^Z

^W W ■ Z S7ZHZ \

^zTszp s dz \

Ic_ _, X Z sz v S

out the line to guide the pencil. The roof is a good illustra-
tion to use as a starting-point. The fact that lines slant both
ways should be clearly shown.

Infant Schools \J

b !

Ai 7 \ z \ / K y

\ iy x z X / IX X

AA A A VA /A A/ >

//N^N^N i\N S X N >i N

\r\Z AAAaaAA a\A\A\A\A

\Z nZ\/xZ A r A A a

WW w ~

\Z \x \r /Nv

^A^A.A __ . jtl

B„B ^Lc ^\t

sz 57 \z ziSkE^

A A A Vr7v^'

S ZllC

sz sz__Kz ixj

A z\ql\ sa

J

^^SZ^^ >z y> z

L

v VI V V vT~ V

$V JL <J^- M% Mb- -m

y y W xff W ~~W

AAA — jA _JA A

in i ir~

The Teaching of Drawing

i

/ W\ s

i Ji \

/s

A

I

s

V

A

<LV

v

v

L—

I

Infant Schools

1 lEi~ I Ml

L -J—

t

Z 77 i/ I>Jz Z7 >Z

^ ~fe

{*&**' m\ S ' rfflMmTJh ^^>

/ >\l ^r i \ \ 1 yffir yMv x

\ Nrff^Vj >> ^^/W^NtrrWx

^ /r jW / c ^WK yffl/ 1^

\Z

j ,

szt SZ , V, ' Ji

1 II '

C 2

The Teaching of Drawing

IT

z "S

it X X

T I -

_t

i \mm--

S _ _ J

Infant Schools

1A

:s

ED5D

Z:

Tin

Teaching

r «

of Drawing

L

vi

ar

j "H

Z i v

A

Yh

I

A

\ J

A

J

v

K

V

/V

x/\lv v

Sy

t±+ "T SS

i
i

I -,i

s Z£

i

*S ZZ

CHAPTER III

STANDARD I

Syllabus — Drawing, freehand and with the ruler, of lines,
angles, parallels, and the simplest right-lined forms, such as some
of those given in Djre's Drawing Book. (To be drawn on
slates.)

The syllabus for this standard is not very difficult, and at
first sight may appear rather monotonous. It will require on
this account great variety of questioning, and copious illustra-
tions showing the practical application of the examples drawn.
When taught with intelligence the work is very interesting and
popular with the children.

The teacher will require : — -

i. Large Blackboard with a dull surface.

2. Chalk, sharpened to a chisel point.

3. Large T-Square, not less than three feet in length,
divided into feet and inches. One with the blade screived on
the stock is preferable, especially for using with the set-squares.

4. Demonstration Sheets.— These save the teacher's time,
and enable the pupils to see at once the object they are going
to draw. If the sheets are not provided, a sketch of the copy
should be placed at one corner of the board previous to the
commencement of the lesson.

The children will require : —

1. Slates about ten inches by seven inches, one side of
which must be plain.

2. Slate-Pencils of good quality (the bad ones scratch the
slates and break easily), which should always be well sharpened
and used for drawing only. When less than three inches in

24 Tlie Tend ling of Drawing

length, they should not be used unless with a holder, as a short
pencil cannot be used with freedom.

3. Rulers. — These should be marked in inches, and if used
for this standard only, halves and quarters will be the only sub-
divisions needed. They should not exceed nine inches in
length, the edge should be bevelled, the scale marks and
figures should be clear and distinct, with the inch marks run-
ning quite across the ruler from edge to edge.

Introductory Lesson

Before children can begin to use the ruler, it is absolutely
necessary that they should thoroughly understand the meaning
of the various marks upon it. This may be made not only an
instructive, but also an exceedingly interesting lesson to young
children. The questioning must be smart and definite, and
accompanied with plenty of practical applications of the various
points elicited. The following lesson is suggestive of the
manner in which the subject should be dealt with.

It must be carefully borne in mind that the children are
young, and only beginning, and are therefore capable of re-
ceiving information in but small quantities, and when expressed
in the clearest and simplest language. Similar lessons will be
found to be frequently necessary in the early stages of teaching
the subject.

What is this ? ' // is a ruler'

(Insist upon the answer being given in the form of a
sentence as far as possible.)

What can you tell me about its edges ? ' They are
straight?

Show a round ruler. Elicit that the ruler used for drawing
with is flat.

Why is it flat ? ' // can be kept firmly on the slate'

Elicit other examples of flat surfaces.

Are the two flat surfaces of the ruler alike ? ' No?

What is the difference between them ? ' One side has marks
and figures upon it.'

Are the marks all alike ?

How many long marks are there ?

Standard I 25

The teacher should now draw a representation of the ruler
on the board, and place the long marks upon it, as indicated on
the children's rulers.

How many parts do the long marks divide the ruler into ?

Note. — This is a very important question, and the difference
between the marks and the parts should be clearly shown, as it is
a very common error for children, even in the higher standards, to
confuse the marks with the parts which they separate. If there be
any difficulty fold a strip of paper into as many parts as there are
on the ruler, cut them up, and let the children count them.

What do you notice near the marks ? ' Figures!

Name the figures. Explain that the figures indicate the
number of parts that the ruler js divided into, and that each of
these parts is called an inch.

How many inches make a foot ? Show a foot ruler.

How many feet high is the door ?

Take other illustrations, and let the objects be rapidly
measured after the children have first estimated the distances.

How many inches long is the book ? Measure it.

How many inches can you span? &c.

How many half-pennies can be placed on the ruler?
(Half-penny=i inch in diameter.)

Now let the children mark several points, a, l>, c, d, on the
left hand side of their slates. From a draw a line 2 inches,
from b 4 inches, from c 5 inches, and from d 6 inches in
length respectively.

The slates should be shown, and rapidly scanned after each
line has been drawn.

The teacher now returns to the blackboard representation
of the ruler, and marks the half- inches.

How many parts have I divided the inch into ?

What would you call each part ?

Hold up your rulers and count each half-inch, pointing
them out with your pencils.

How many half- inches is the whole ruler divided into?

Now mark points as before, and draw lines of 2^-, 4 h, 6^,
and i\ inches in length respectively.

The Teaching of Drawing

Next mark the quarter-inches, and proceed in a similar
manner.

Smaller divisions should not be taken for this standard. If the
children are carefully and systematically taught after this fashion,
there will be no difficulty as to the practical use of the ruler.

Method of Using the Pencil and Ruler— The ruler must
always be placed with the bevelled edge upwards, and held firmly
in position with the fingers well distributed, and placed near the
centre of the ruler, as shown in the illustration, and not at the end.

The pencil should be held sloping at about an angle of 6o°,
with its point close to the edge of the ruler. In ruling the lines

be careful to insist that
the pupils always rule
along the, upper edge, and
from left to right or from
top to bottom.

The teacher should
show carefully the
method of joining two
points. Place two
points, a and b, on the
board, and place the
point of the chalk on b ; now place the bevelled edge of the
ruler against the point of the chalk, keep the chalk firm, and

Standard I

move the end of the ruler up until it reaches point a. Hold
the ruler firm, remove the chalk to a, and rule the line. This
is rather difficult for beginners, but it will save a considerable
amount of time and trouble if persevered with at first. Ex-
amples should now be given until the children can join the
points readily.

Care must be taken that the points to be joined are not
covered up by the ruler. The teacher may now give the defini-
tion. A straight line is the shortest distance between two joints.

The opportunity should be taken here to show that all lines
drawn with the ruler are straight lines, no matter what their
direction may be, as children frequently confuse the term
straight with level and upright.

Lengthening Lines. — To lengthen a line the pencil and ruler
should be used in the same manner as in joining two points.
Place the pencil on the line, adjust the ruler as in fig. 82,
and rule to the required length without showing the joining.

First Drawing Exercise. — The children may now proceed
to the first exercise suggested in the 'Illustrated Syllabus,'
viz. : — To draw a number of parallel lines in various positions.

1. Horizontal Lines. — Mark two
points, a and b, one inch and a half
from the top of the slate, and
through these points rule a line four
inches long, as shown in the pre-
vious exercise. Set off distances of
one inch with the ruler from each
end of the line, ab. [Place the ruler
for setting off the distances, as
shown in fig. 83, with the inch mark
on the line ; the distances can then
be quickly marked without moving
the ruler.] Rule the lines firmly
and evenly, and insist upon all
leaving the line when ruled. Allow
no rubbing out. It is far better to

leave the line when ruled, even if not quite accurate, than
to attempt to alter it by rubbing out, as the children not only

28 The Teaching of Drawing

smudge the slate, but waste time by getting behind with their
work.

Commendation must be freely distributed, as little children
especially are stimulated to greater emulation by judicious
praise. Four or five lines only should be drawn at first, or the
exercise becomes wearisome. A short lesson with plenty of
questions and illustrations is the most profitable.

Questions of the following character are suggested.

How many lines are there ?

What sort of lines are they ? ' They are straight lines'

What is a straight line ? ' The shortest distance between two
points.'

How long is each of the lines ?

What else can you tell me about them ? ' They are all the
same length.'

Explain the term 'equal.'

What position are the lines in ? ' Level.'

Explain the meaning of ' level,' and show how the surface of
water keeps level even when the vessel containing it is tilted to
one side.

Tell me something else that is level. ' The floor.'

Elicit numerous other examples.

What else can you tell me about the lines, besides being
straight, equal, and level? ' They are the same distance apart.1

Explain the term ' parallel.'

What is parallel to the floor ? • The ceiling.'

Educe plenty of examples, such as opposite walls, edges of
books, slates, desks, boards, windows, railway lines, &c.

The definition of parallel lines may now be given.

The term horizontal may be used as well as level ; children
use it quite as readily. The meaning of horizon must be
clearly given, and if the children live near, or have been to the
sea-side, they will have no difficulty in realising what the
horizon is.

All the terms used should be put on the board, and copied
by the pupils, but it is not desirable to write up definitions
for young children. Frequent questioning is more interesting,
and secures the desired result just as well.

Standard I 29

2. Vertical Lines. — Show that lines may be in other posi-
tions besides being level by referring to the walls, roofs, &c.
Draw upright or vertical lines in a similar manner to that
adopted for the horizontal lines in fig. 83.

3. Oblique Lines.— Draw in a similar fashion to the pre-
ceding, and show that they may slope either way. It will pro-
bably be easier for the children to turn the slate into a sloping
position with a corner towards them in doing this exercise.

The floor and the walls give two useful comparisons for
horizontal and vertical lines. The use of the plumb line by
workmen should be referred to, and it should be used to test
whether objects in the room, or lines on the blackboard, are
vertical.

It is now very good practice to let the children draw parallel
lines by judging the distance with the eye only. To do this,
let them first mark the points for the left-hand end of the lines
only before ruling.

Freehand Drawing of Parallel Lines.— The children will
now be fairly familiar with the ruler and the various terms re-
lating to lines, and may proceed to the real difficulty, viz.— the
drawing of straight lines without the aid of the ruler. In teach-
ing, it is undoubtedly much easier to do the ruled copy first,
and then proceed to the freehand. At examinations the free-
hand is generally required to be drawn first.

The pencil should be held freely, not close to the point, and
making an acute angle with the slate. The points for the first
line should then be marked, and the child taught to guide his

The Teaching of Drawing

pencil by noticing the top of the slate. Then, after carefully
taking the pencil across from point to point without marking
the slate, the line should be lightly drawn across without join-
ings or stopping. The hand must not lie upon the slate, but
the little finger may just touch to ensure steadiness to the hand.
Now mark the position of the next line, and draw it in a similar
manner. The lines in the earlier lessons should not be drawn
too long. Practice will enable the children to draw longer
lines successfully. If the ends of the parallel lines be joined a
simple pattern is at once formed, and additional interest is
thereby given to the lesson.

Arrangement of the Drawing". — It is perhaps advisable to
call attention here to the arrangement of the drawing on the
slates. Some inspectors prefer the ruler and freehand drawings
to be both on the same side of the slate, others require each
drawing to fill the slate. The latter plan is much more difficult,
as the lines run to a considerable length,
but it has the advantage of securing much
better and bolder work.

If the two are required on the same
side, divide the slate into two parts by
setting off five inches from the top, at
each side of the slate, and ruling a line
across. Now, if the figure required be a
square of four inch sides, let the children
draw the first line half-an-inch from the
dividing line, commencing about one and
a half inches from the left:hand side of the
slate. This will ensure the drawing being placed nicely on the
slate, thus adding considerably to its appearance, and also

Standard I

training the children to place their work symmetrically. If the
freehand drawing be the same figure, first draw the top line
ah the square above forming a guide.

When, however, only one drawing is required on each side,
reserve the plain side of the slate for the freehand, and work
the ruled drawing on the other side. The position of the draw-
ing on the slate must always be thought out before beginning.
A six-inch square placed as in fig. 88 is certainly more effec-
tive than one placed as in fig. 89.

Angles. — These should now be taken and drawn in various
positions, both freehand and with the ruler, and arranged on
the slates according to the methods suggested.

Acute

Right

Obtuse

The children must be able to recognise and draw the angles
in any position.

The Teaching of Drawing

G)

In explaining the three kinds of angles it is advisable to
commence with the right angle, and show that it is the corner
made by the upright wall meeting the level floor, and that the
largest angle of the set-square will exactly fit it. Numerous
examples should now be elicited and tested with the set-square.
The fact should be pointed out that all right angles are
equal, irrespective of the length or position of the lines forming
them. The terui perpendicular may now be explained, and
the difference between vertical and perpendicular pointed
out, that whereas vertical means upright and refers to one posi-
tion of the line only, perpendicular means that a line is at right
angles to some other line and may be in any position. This
is an exceedingly common error, and should be clearly ex-
plained and well illustrated. A perpendicular line may now
be defined as a straight line at right angles to another straight
line.

Acute and Obtuse angles
should be defined as being re-
spectively less or greater than a
right angle. An open book fur-
nishes a ready illustration ; open
it at a right angle and test it
with the set-square, and then
obtain the acute and obtuse
angles. The fact should be con-
stantly before the pupil that the

— lengths of the lines forming the

angle do not regulate its size.

Construction of the right
angle. — On paper the set-square
should always be used, but on
slates it will probably be found
more convenient to use the ruler
only, as the slate frame prevents
the set-square from being used
easily. To construct a right
angle with the aid of the ruler only, first draw ab (fig. 91).
Now place the ruler so that one of the marks showing the

CO

m

Standard I 33

inches, which runs right across the ruler at right angles to its
edges, exactly coincides with the line ab A perpendicular
may now be drawn of any given length. It is most essential
that the teacher should see that the line on the ruler exactly
coincides with the line first drawn.

The Square

Directly the construction of the right angle is under-
stood, its combinations may at once be proceeded with.
The square affords a large number
of exercises, as a great variety of ^
simple patterns may be made from
it. The position of the starting line
should receive careful attention ;
this will, of course, depend upon the
size of the square to be drawn. The
remarks on the ' arrangement of the
drawing,' figs. 87, 83, and 89, will
make clear what is necessary to be
done. The teacher must always see
that the starting line is properly placed. To draw the square
commence with line ab, placed as previously directed : now
place the ruler as in fig. 91 and obtain ad and be. Make
them equal to ab, and complete the figure by joining d with e.
Plenty of questions should be given as the drawing proceeds,
which should be recapitulated and supplemented at the end of
the lesson.

What sort of a line is ab ? ' Straight a?id also horizontal?

Then, if ab be horizontal, what will be the position of ad}
1 Vertical:

What other line in the figure is vertical ?

What else do you notice about ad and be ? ' They are parallel:

In what position is de ?

If ad be at right angles to ab, what else may be said about
it ? ' 7/ is perpendicular to ab:

How many right angles does the figure contain ?

How many equal sides ?

What is the figure called ?

D

The Teaching of Drawing

Then a square is a figure with four equal sides and four
equal angles.

Particular attention must be given to the firmness and even
thickness of the lines, and to the accuracy of the joinings at the
angles.

The square should now be drawn freehand, following the
same method, but starting from the middle line as suggested
in fig. 87.

Dictation of Drawing. — This is an exceedingly useful
exercise, as it keeps all the class together, stimulates the intelli-
gence, compels the children to think and act promptly, and
affords an excellent method of testing whether the work has
been thoroughly mastered. The following examples will show
what is meant : the teacher can, of course, vary them in an
infinite variety of ways.

1. Mark a point near the bottom of the slate one inch from
the left hand side. From this point draw a horizontal line, five
inches long. From each end of the line draw upright lines
four inches long. Join the ends of these lines.

2. Draw a vertical line four inches long down the middle
of the slate. From the top of this line draw a line to the left
at right angles to it, and two inches long. Find the middle of
the vertical line with your ruler. Join this point with the
end of the two-inch line.

3. Draw a square of six-inch sides. Find the middle of each
side with your ruler. Join the middle point of the bottom
side of the square with the middle point of the side parallel to it.

Diameters and Diagonals. — The diameter of a square is a
line joining the centres of the opposite sides.

Standard I

In drawing the ruled examples, bisect the sides with the aid
of the ruler. In the freehand the sides of the square must be
carefully bisected by trial.

The diagonal joins the opposite cortiers, and is much more
difficult to draw, the tendency being to curve the line outwards
from the hand.

The pencil should be carried across from corner to corner
without touching the slate before putting in the line. It will
assist the beginner if the slate be turned so that the diagonals
would be in a horizontal position. It is not, however, a good plan
to allow the children to turn their slates or papers to any great
extent, as after practice they can draw the line just as readily
in one direction as another, and greater power and freedom in
using the pencil is acquired by keeping the paper in the same
position.

Lines Intersecting at Right Angles

Fig. 95. — First draw the vertical line. Bisect it and draw

ie horizontal line, using the ruler to get the right angle as in
fig. 91. For the. freehand proceed in a similar manner.

Fig. 96. — The square shown in dotted line should be very

u 2

The Teaching of Drawing

lightly drawn, and the diagonals inserted. In the freehand
example, the square should then be carefully cleaned out. If,
however, the length of the lines were given, then first draw ab,
sloping as nearly as possible in the given position, and obtain
the other line at right angles to it, in the same manner as in
the preceding figure.

Fig. 97. — Draw the dotted square, insert the diameters and
diagonals, and for the freehand clean out the parts shown in
dotted line, taking care to leave all the lines of equal length.

a

kT

N j

aX

"hr

Fig. 98. — Draw the square, set off the widths either from
the centres, a, of the sides, or from the angles, whichever may
be most convenient : the distance between the lines and the
size of the square will determine this. For the freehand, the
best plan will be to set off the distance on each side of the
point a, and then draw the lines.

Fig. 99. — Draw the square, set off equal distances on each
side from the angles, and join the points. This figure is
occasionally set to be drawn without the
aid of the square. It then forms a most
difficult exercise. The best way to pro-
ceed is to fix point a in the middle of the
slate. Incline the slate and mark poiots
b and c in the same line as a, and equi-
distant from it. Through b and c draw
parallel lines. Obtain de at right angles
to be, and make ad and ae equal to ac
and ab. Through d and e draw lines at right angles to
the other lines. Or the small square formed by the intersec-

Standard I

tion of the lines may be drawn first, and its sides produced
equally on each side.

The Bisection and Trisection of the Right Angle

These problems should now be taken. The right angle
may be bisected by completing the square and drawing the
diagonal ; afterwards cleaning out the portions in dotted line
(fig. 100). A better and easier plan is to use the 450 set-square.
First, obtain the right angle, and then use the ruler and set-
square as shown in fig. 101.

To trisect the right angle the set-square with the angle of
300 should be used, as it is the only really quick and accurate
method by which the operation can be performed. The only
point that requires careful watching is to see that the lines are
drawn true from the angle. The method of procedure is as

follows. Draw the right angle as large as the space will allow.
Place the ruler as in fig. 102, but not too close to the

The Teaching of -Drawing

line. Adjust the set-square with the angle of 300 as shown,
and rule a line. Now reverse the set-square (still keeping the
ruler firmly in its place), place it with the angle of 6o° in
the right angle, and rule the second
line (fig*. 103). This problem should be
practised by the pupils several times,
until they can do it readily and quickly.
For freehand, this is an exceed-
ingly difficult copy. The simplest plan
is to estimate the widths between the
lines, by marking points a and b, and
drawing from them short lines to the
angle. If the distances appear correct,
then produce the lines. Children require to perform this
operation a number of times before they can estimate the
distances with accuracy.

The Rectangle

This figure will present no fresh difficulties to the pupils
after the square has been dealt with.

Various exercises are now
given, many of which have been
set for examination. The teacher
can multiply these in a variety
of ways. It is not so necessary
for the pupils to practise a large
number of exercises, as to
thoroughly understand the best
methods of obtaining lines in
particular directions with ease and accuracy.

The dotted lines show the construction necessary to obtain
the lines of the figure. They should not be drawn by the
pupils.

Fig. 139. — The square in this position is much more diffi-
cult to draw. It is necessary to obtain the diagonals first. Draw
ab of the required length. Bisect it with the ruler, and draw
cd at right angles. Make cd equal to ab, and join the ends of

Standard I

nS

H9

III

X

K

t)

N

4° The Teaching of Drawing

the lines. The construction lines should not be rubbed out in
these figures.

Fig. 140. — Draw the diagonals as before, and complete the
square. To obtain the lines ac and bdt the distances, eg and gf

must be bisected with the ruler, and the lines drawn perpendi-
cular to ef If the diagonals are given, the dimensions of the
sides of the square are not known, and cannot be directly
bisected with the ruler. Care must be taken to see that ac and
bd are drawn exactly perpendicular to ef.

Standard I

The interior of the square may be filled up in a variety of

ways.

Fig. 145. — Draw a square. Insert the diameters, and
afterwards clean out the part shown in dotted line.

Fig. 146. — Draw a rectangle with its sides in the propor-
tion of three to two. Divide the longer sides into three, and

r

P 1 I »

t I I

I 1 I

I I I

the shorter into two equal parts. Draw the lines cutting the
figure into six equal squares. Clean out the parts shown by
dotted lines.

Fig. 147. — This may be done as shown by the dotted lines,
or the two bottom squares may be drawn first, the centres of
their top lines found, and the top square constructed. For
freehand the first method is much better, as the correct
proportions of the squares are more easily obtained.

The construction lines show the method in the above
figures.

42 The Teaching of Drawing

Memory Drawing

This is a valuable aid in every standard towards securing
really intelligent work. The best plan to adopt is to let the
pupils draw from memory the copy taken in the previous lesson.
This need not be a long exercise, and it will test whether the
methods used have been thoroughly understood, as well as
strengthen the pupil's powers of observation. In the upper
standards special attention should be paid to knowledge of
the analysis of the copy. It is not at all important that the
pupil should remember every little detail \ it is the power of
blocking in the masses correctly that needs cultivation.

CHAPTER IV

STANDARD II

Syllabus. — The same as for Standard I, but on paper.
The teacher will require two large set-squares in addition
to the apparatus for Standard I.
The children will require : —

i. Paper. — This should be of the regulation size, n by
7 \ inches, with a smooth unglazed surface. There is a
diversity of opinion as to which is the more convenient form to
use, books or paper. Many teachers prefer to use loose sheets,
as they are more easily manipulated, while on the other hand
books are decidedly cleaner, and as a rule children are proud
of a well filled book.

2. Pencils. — The most suitable pencils are the hexagonal-
shaped, as they do not roll off the desks. Cheap pencils are

not necessarily the most economical ;
pencils with crumbling leads or hard
wood only produce bad work and
cause vexation to both teachers and
scholars. The marks of various
makers differ in degree of hardness,
H and F in some are as soft as HB
in others. On the whole HB when
not too soft is the most useful
pencil to adopt. Pencils must always
it is impossible to secure accurate
is attended to. A sharp knife is the
best instrument to use, although some of the pencil sharpeners
produce a fair point.

Fig. 151. — A shows the form the point should take ; when
cut as in B the point breaks almost directly. It is a very useful

be kept well pointed, as
and neat work unless this

44 The Teaching of Drawing

plan to point the pencil at both ends, as the pupil is then pro-
vided with a good point throughout the lesson.

Indiarubber. — This should be white and flexible. If the
piece be cut in halves along its length it is more useful, as it
bends easier, and there is less waste. It should not be used
for the ruler drawing, and very sparingly for freehand in the
lower standards.

Set-squares. — Those having angles of 450 and 6o° are the
only ones needed. They should be of good size, large enough
to draw 6-inch lines, and about ^ inch thick j they will not then
readily break.

Directions. — The same methods of procedure as given for
Standard I are equally applicable here. The only additional
points to be illustrated will be the improved constructions
obtained by the use of the set-squares. The same kind of
oral questioning must accompany each lesson, and additional
skill in answering and giving illustrations should be required.

The character of the line used should receive special
attention, as bad habits formed at the beginning are exceed-
ingly difficult to eradicate. For the ruler work a good, bold,
firm line should be adopted, so that the figure stands out well
from the construction lines, which should be put in as lightly as
possible. In the freehand, which will probably need more
time than the ruler work, the sketching in must be done very
lightly and carefully j the pupil should always first indicate the
ends of the lines before drawing them, and after passing the
pencil carefully between them several times to obtain a general
idea of the direction, finally draw the line with one clean, light
stroke. The teacher must keep a sharp watch to see that the
pencil is held properly. The fingers must not be too near the
point, nor in a cramped position. When the copy has been
carefully sketched in, the construction lines should be rubbed
out, the whole figure cleaned with the indiarubber, and after-
wards finished with a clean even line. By lining in, it is not
meant that the line should be blackened over (thus frequently
spoiling the drawing), but carefully putting in an even line and
improving the shape and finish of the copy. Many condemn
the use of indiarubber entirely in this Standard, but with care

Standard II

it may be advantageously used to clean up the copy. The
cuffs of the pupils' coats should be turned up, and not allowed
to rub over the lines drawn, or to soil the paper. Cleanliness
must be strictly enforced, or the work will be a continuous
source of vexation to the teacher.

Ruler Work

Parallels. — Place the ruler in a vertical position, and hold
it firmly with the thumb and third finger of the left hand.
Now adjust the set- square as shown, placing one edge in a line

with one of the inch marks on the ruler, and taking care to
impress upon the pupil the necessity of keeping the other
edge touching the ruler throughout its length. Keep the
set-square in position by pressing it firmly with the first and
second fingers, and rule a line. If the set-square be now
slipped with the right hand to the next inch mark while the
ruler is still held in position with the left hand, parallels one
inch apart will be obtained. Repeat the exercise with parallels
2 inches and \ inch apart.

The Teaching- of Drawing

Vertical and oblique parallels may now be drawn in a
similar manner. Attention should be directed to the fact that
while one edge of the set-square gives horizontal lines, the
other edge will give oblique lines, but not the same distance
apart.

The teacher will find that it will amply repay for the trouble
taken, to teach the uses of the set-squares at this early stage ;
as not only can the figures be drawn more accurately, but the
difficulty will be overcome for the other standards ; and the
work of Standard III will be made easier, more interesting,
and more pleasurable to the pupils. Constant vigilance, care,
and patience must be exercised when the set-squares are first
used ; the method of using them must be repeatedly shown on
the blackboard, and every pupil must be supervised to see that
the proper way of handling them is thoroughly comprehended.
A very common error to guard against is the attempt to draw
the lines without keeping one edge of the set-square touching
the ruler. The children may also be shown that it is not abso-
lutely necessary for the set-square to be of this particular shape ;
any right-angled figure, such as a slate or book, will also
give parallels and perpendiculars.

Perpendiculars. — Exercises in setting up perpendiculars
from points in lines in various positions, such as those suggested
in fig. 153, should now be given. Dictated exercises may be
used here with advantage.

All right angles should now be set up, bisected, and tri-
sected by using the set-squares.

The reason for these processes may be demonstrated here

Standard II

with advantage. Describe a large circle on the board, and
draw two diameters at right angles to each other. Fit the set-
square into each of the four angles formed, and show that each
is a right angle. Now explain that as we use long measure to
determine the length of an object, avoirdupois to determine the
weight, and other measures to determine content, time, area,
&c, so we use a measure to determine the size of an angle.
Each one of these right angles is divided into 90 parts by lines
drawn from the angle, and the width of the very sharp angle
thus formed is called a degree. This may be easily illustrated
by describing a large circle on paper and dividing it into four
right angles. Divide one of the right angles into nine equal

divisions, and subdivide one of these divisions into ten, thus
showing the actual size of a degree. If the space between the
lines be blackened in as shown in the angle of io°, fig. 154,
it will be more readily comprehended. Now take three set-
squares, place them with their smallest angles fitting into the
right angle. The reason for using the set-square for trisecting
a right angle will at once be seen. The number of degrees in
the small angle may be elicited, and if two set- squares be
removed it will be found that the larger angle of one set square
will exactly fit in place of the two, thus giving the angle of 6o°.
In the same manner two of the 450 set-squares may be shown

The Teaching of Drawing

to fit the same right angle, and consequently one of them would
bisect it.

Introduction of Curves and the Drawing of Common
Objects. — The Illustrated Syllabus suggests that : — 'In order
to interest the children it is advisable to teach them to draw as
early as possible from actual objects, such as the doors, windows,
furniture and apparatus of the school- room. It will also be
found quite possible and very desirable to go beyond the fore-
going standards in teaching. Thus freehand drawing of bold
curves may be introduced in Standards
I and II ; and exercises may be ad-
vantageously given in all standards in
drawing from memory.'

With regard to the drawing of
common objects, they should only be
drawn in the flat, and from the teacher's
directions ; they then form a valuable
introduction to the scale drawing of
Standard IV. Examples similar to the
end elevation of a desk, fig. 156, the
block letters, and many of the simple
objects suggested in the Infants' course
form good examples. The teacher,
however, should carefully work out the
measurements beforehand, so that the
drawing may not appear distorted.

Freehand curves may be easily introduced without inter-
fering with the other work. The squares and oblongs already
drawn can be utilised as a framework for the curves. The
cleverer children will in many lessons be able to insert the
curves while the others are finishing the ordinary copy. The
following examples illustrate a few of the ways in which this
may be carried out. The same copies may also be utilised
for the work of Standard III at the commencement of the
year.

The drawing of simple patterns should be followed up
here as frequently as possible, as it encourages originality
among the children and is a pleasing variation from the other

r

V

j

Standard II

50 The Teaching of Draiving

A

r

r

r

r

(S

J

V

J

V

Standard II 51

work. If the children are allowed to colour the pattern, as
suggested on page 5, a wonderful degree of interest will be
created in the work. Examples such as those given in the
Infants' course, figs. 45-70, are suitable for this purpose. The
squared paper of ordinary exercise books answers very well for
drawing upon.

E 2

52 The TeacJung of Drawing

CHAPTER V

STANDARD III

Syllabus. — (a) Freehand drawing of regular forms and
curved figures from the flat.

(b) Simple geometrical figures with rulers.

These right-lined figures to be drawn freehand and also ivith
rulers.

These requirements then resolve themselves into three
parts.

I. Freehand drawing of curved figures, which I have divided
into three stages.

II. Freehand drawing of right-lined forms.

III. Drawing of geometrical figures with rulers.

The same apparatus will be required as for Standard II.

I. FREEHAND DRAWING OF CURVED FIGURES

This is by far the most important and also the most difficult
part of the course for this Standard, and will require a greater
amount of time than the geometrical drawing. The pupil must
be trained to rely more upon his own powers. Hitherto the
figures dealt with have been regular in form, and the proportion,
or relation which one part of the drawing bears to the other, has
been obtained by the help of the ruler, or from definite instruc-
tions furnished by the teacher. The pupil must now be shown
how to analyse and understand the principles of construction
upon which the copy is based, and how to obtain the proper
proportions between its various parts. If these important
principles are well grounded at this stage, the freehand and

Standard III 53

model drawing of the upper standards, upon which so much
depends, will be executed with much greater correctness, ease,
and pleasure.

First Stage. — As the pupils are now thoroughly familiar
with the drawing of rectangular forms, it will be found much
easier to introduce curved forms by using these rectangular forms
as aids. The curves should not be drawn very large at first, as
simple curves when too large are very awkward for the beginner
to draw ; nor is it advisable to spend too long a time over
them, as, though they are very necessary, and give excellent
training in freedom of hand and knowledge of form, they are
somewhat uninteresting to the pupil. They should be drawn
about the size suggested on the figures, and the construction
lines, which must be indicated very lightly, may be allowed to
remain, the most important point at this stage being to secure
good curves.

Figs. 180-190. — The pupils must be shown from the black-
board how to obtain the curves with one careful sweep, after
the pencil has been carried several times over the paper, so
that the general direction of the curve may be obtained before
marking it in. On no account must the pupil be allowed
to draw the line thickly or in little bits. Adhere as far as pos-
sible to the rule already laid down viz., to draiv from left to
right and from top to bottom.

Some teachers prefer to use slates in the first instance, but
this is open to great objection and is an encouragement to
careless work, as alterations may be made so readily ; whereas
one of the most important points to inculcate is that when a
line is drawn it should not need much alteration, and must
remain. The knowledge that the line cannot be easily removed
compels the pupil to think where it must be placed, and thus
gives confidence and begets carefulness.

Second Stage. — In the next series of examples the construc-
tion lines must be carefully cleaned out, and the figure, after
being correctly sketched, should be rubbed out until only a
faint line is visible. The drawing should then be carefully
lined in with a sharp pencil ; and here it is again pointed out
that the lining in is for the purpose of obtaining an even, con-

54 The Teaching of Draiving

. Y

r\

Y

r

^J

A

v;

y

Standard III 55

tinuous line, and an improvement in the shape and finish of
the copy.

The pupil should be taught here how to divide a line into
three equal parts, a much more difficult process than dividing
it into two. The following method given by Mr. Taylor in his
excellent book on ' Elementary Art Teaching ' is exceedingly

useful. If AB be the line to be trisected, then place a finger
of the left hand on the line at the same time with the pencil
which is to mark the first division ; by this means the equality
of the three parts may be more easily judged.

Figs. 192-200 are all based on the circle, and should be
drawn without the aid of squares. The light lines show the
necessary construction. Care should be taken to see that the
semicircles run into each other at their junction with a con-
tinuous line without showing any angle. About six inches is a
convenient size for the longest line in these examples, which
should all be carefully lined in when drawn.

Third Stage. — Before beginning the next series of examples,
which are of the same character as examination tests, the pupil
must be taught how to measure, by means of the pencil,
objects which are not accessible. This is a most useful and
necessary exercise, and should be continually used to ascertain
the relationship between the various parts of the copy. Great
care and patience will be needed on the teacher's part to see
that the method is clearly understood, as the pupil's future pro-
gress is largely dependent upon this. Directly the method has
been mastered, the power of self-reliance is greatly increased,
and it becomes quite exceptional to find the proportion of the
figure inaccurate,

The Teaching of Drawing

Standard III

Begin by measuring objects in the room — such as windows,
boards, &c. — that can be seen in a similar position by the bulk
of the class : taking care always to ask the children to estimate
first the relative sizes by means of the eye, and afterwards
verify them by measuring with the pencil.

Suppose the example selected be a window, then the
method of proceeding would be somewhat as follows : —

Which is the greater, the height or the width of the
window ?

How much greater is the height than the width ?
After obtaining approximately accurate replies, show how to
verify with the pencil.

Hold the pencil horizontally at arm's length, close one eye,
and let the end of the pencil be held in a line with the side
(A) of the window (fig. 201).
Keep this end steady, and slip the 201

thumb along the pencil until it is
in line with the other side (B) of
the window. The distance between
the end of the pencil and the
thumb nail will represent the actual
width of the window as seen by the

pupil. (Take care to see that the &\

pencil is held at right angles to the
arm.) Let the pupils hold up
their pencils, still keeping the thumb
in position. The teacher will then
see at a glance whether the distance
has been correctly gauged. Now
step this distance vertically up the

window. The pupils will readily see that this method fur-
nishes them with a ready means of testing the proportions of
their drawing. After a few other measurements of various
objects, the best plan
comparing them with
follows : —

Draw AB (fig. 202). Compare it with the height of the
board. Lengthen the line to C

is to take lines on the blackboard,
the board and with each other as

The Teaching of Drawing

c

D

B

r

A

Where is point B? 'A little below the half'
How do you know this ?
Compare CD with AC.

How many times can CD be
set off on AC?

Then what part is CD of
AC? lA little less than one-
third.'

Compare BE with AC lA
little more than half

Similar exercises should fre-
quently be given at the com-
mencement until the method is
thoroughly comprehended. In
all cases let the comparison be
made first with the eye and after-
wards verified with the pencil.

A typical lesson is given
here to show how to apply the
method advantageously. Such lessons are frequently required
at the examination.

Apparatus. — Demonstration sheet or a drawing of the figure
to be placed before the class, pencils, paper, &c.
What is the copy like ? ' A leaf
What shape is the leaf? ' Like a triangle!
What line shall I draw first ? ' The upright line through the
middle'

Now that I have drawn the height, what shall I want to know
next ? ' The ividth.'

Where is the leaf widest ? * At the bottom!
Compare AB (fig. 203) with the height. After eliciting a
number of answers, let the pupils measure AB with their pencils
and verify their answers by stepping the distance up the height
line. It will be found to go three times and a little over. Now
require the answer to be given in this form : ' AB is a little less
than one-third of the height.' Divide your line into three equal
parts as previously shown, and mark the first division, a,
fig. 204. Now, if we make be and bd a little less than ab, the

Standard III

correct width of the copy will be ascertained. Join e with d
and ct keeping the lines very light.

I would point out here the extreme undesirability of cutting up
the height line into halves, quarters, &c, and constructing a frame-
work from these parts. In actual drawings the proportions are
very rarely exact parts of the upright line. These divisions should
only be used, as in this case, as guides.

Now draw the stalk, and lines ad and ac, thus producing a
general resemblance to the leaf.

The remainder of the copy is very difficult. The attention
of the pupils should be directed to the following points.
Notice the number of bends in the side of the leaf, and place a
light mark to show where they come, as at points /, g, h. If
the pencil be held in a line with e and d, it will be apparent as
to how much of the copy projects outside of the triangle.
Also notice that the bottom curves are slightly larger than the
others. The left side should then be very lightly indicated,
and examined carefully before drawing in firmly, the other side

6o The Teaching of Drawing

drawn to correspond, and the copy afterwards cleaned and
lined in

The advantage of proceeding in this manner is that the
pupil is drawing with the head as well as with the hand. It
will be noticed that nothing has been told, every step being
obtained from the pupils. A copy taught thus takes consider-
able time at first, but the time will have been well spent, and
the teacher will be amply repaid for the trouble taken. A few
copies thoroughly taught in this fashion will be found to be of
more value than weeks of unintelligent mechanical copying.
This example forms a capital test for memory drawing.

Figs. 205-209 are examples of lines springing from a
central stem. The dotted lines show the method of construc-
tion, and the figures denote the order in which the lines should
be drawn. Very great care should be bestowed upon the
junctions of the side lines with the stem : they should run into
the main line easily, gradually forming part of it. This will
need constant illustration on the blackboard.

Fig. 205. — First find the position of a and b, and draw
lines starting from the centre line as shown at the side (A). This
will prevent the joining line from showing a tendency to run
through, instead of into, the main line as shown in (B). Draw
a line to get the level of the two bottom curves. Ascertain the
width of be as shown in the foregoing lesson, and draw the left
hand curve first. Now balance this with the corresponding
curve on the right. On 710 account must one half of the copy
be drawn first : this is a most mischievous plan and should
never be allowed. Now mark point e and draw a line through
it. Fix the position of/ and g, and draw the top curves.

Fig. 206 shows an example of alternate radiation. Mark the
points a, b, c, d first, and draw the curves as in the last example,
commencing with number i. Notice that each curve bends
down more as the bottom is approached, somewhat similar to
the branches of a tree.

In all cases always work from the copy placed before the
class, so that the pupils may see and understand the reasons
for the processes carried on.

In Figs. 219-231 the necessary construction lines are indi-

Standard III

The Teaching of Drawing

Standard III

cated by the dotted lines, and those figures which are more
difficult are shown in their various stages. At each of these
steps the drawings should be carefully examined, the method
given in the sample lesson being followed out in all cases. If
thought desirable some of these copies may be left at any of
the stages shown, as they are rather more difficult than is
usually expected from this Standard, although they are given in
the syllabus, and form excellent examples to teach from.
Figs. 229-231 are also suitable for the earlier stages of
Standard IV freehand.

The work of the lower standards is very rarely tested by
cards instead of by the large sheets. If, however, this be done,
the general rule is to make the drawing as large as the paper
will allow, taking care to leave a fair margin, as this adds to the
appearance of the drawing.

The TeacJiing of Drawing

Standard III

66 The lead ting of Drawing

II. FREEHAND DRAWING OF RIGHT-LINED FORMS

This is a continuation of the freehand work of Standard II,
and is not very difficult when the children have learned how to
estimate the relative lengths of the lines of the figures. The
knowledge of proportion which they have already obtained is
now especially useful. In the following examples the pupils
must be able to see the proper direction of lines which are
partly hidden, and also the proper method of drawing the
figures,

Figs. 232, 233, 234, 240, and 242 are all examples of one
figure overlapping a portion of another. The hidden parts of
the lines marked a are shown by dots.

Figs. 235 and 237. — Draw the base. Find the position of b,
by comparing be with bd. Draw the altitude, compare it with
the base, and complete the triangle. The other vertical lines are
drawn from the middle points of the sides.

Fig. 236. — Draw the square first, after comparing its height
with the height of the triangle, so that the figure may be pro-
perly placed on the paper. Draw ef and obtain the equilateral
triangle fgh. Draw the sides fg and//£ to meet the base of the
square produced.

Fig. 238. — Draw the square and produce its base. Compare
np with the base of the square, and draw pr. Compare ////
with ftp, and draw the other side of the triangle.

Fig. 241. — Begin with lines ab and ed.

Fig. 242.— Draw the rectangle bede. Find points f, g, /i, /
and through them draw the lines for the other rectangle.

Fig. 243. — Draw ab and find the position of e. Draw ed
and^, comparing u and bf with ae, and complete the figure.

Proceed similarly with the other figures, in all cases insist-
ing upon a careful study and testing of the figure by measuring
with both eye and pencil. Many of the examples for ruler
drawing will furnish other suitable exercises.

Standard III

h

c

<x

I

d

e

6S

The Teaching of Drawing

III. DRAWING OF GEOMETRICAL FIGURES WITH
RULERS

This is generally the most attractive part of the work of
this Standard, and forms an excellent preparation for the geo-
metrical work of the higher standards, as a high degree of
neatness and accuracy is demanded. A knowledge of the
methods of constructing the triangle, square, rectangle, rhom-
bus, pentagon, hexagon, octagon, and figures based upon them,
together with simple bordering patterns, such as frets, &c, is
necessary.

It is most important that the pupil should be acquainted
with the proper method of drawing these figures, and the plan
given in the following lesson should be rigidly adhered to. If
this course be adopted the pupils will soon be able to measure
up a copy for themselves, and decide upon the size and con -
struction necessary.

The cards given at the examination usually contain two
figures which have to be drawn larger. This prevents unin-
telligent copying, and requires the pupil to possess a knowledge
of the construction necessary to draw the example. The paper
should be divided into two parts as in fig. 245, and one figure
placed in each half.

a

s

A

The following lesson will best illustrate the way in which
the figures should be taught.

Apparatus. — The board should be placed as in fig. 245, and
divided into two equal portions by a line ab. It will then cor-
respond with the paper upon which the pupils are drawing. A

Standard III 69

copy of the figure without construction lines should be placed
before the class. This will correspond with the card which the
pupil will be required to work from at the examination. It will
be sufficient for the present if the teacher
dictates the sizes of the lines to be drawn.
Both teacher and pupils will also need
rulers and set-squares.

The teacher will explain that he is
going to make his drawing a little larger
than the copy, and that it must be placed
in the top half of the board.

1. Place the ruler on the copy and
rule the continuous lines as shown by
the dots on fig. 244. The pupils will

then see that the copy is constructed upon three parallel
horizontal lines, intersected by vertical parallels forming a
number of squares.

2. Measure ab. Suppose it to measure half an inch ; then,
if the copy has to be enlarged, ab on the pupil's drawing might
be made three-quarters of an inch.

Note. — The teacher should have his ruler marked so that four
inches on his ruler represent one inch on the pupil's ruler.

3. Draw a very faint line of indefinite length about one inch
from ab (fig. 245), and set off on it as many spaces of three-
quarters of an inch each as there are squares required (in this
case six). Fix the position of the first point a (fig. 244) care-
fully, so that the copy may be well placed on the paper. About
one inch from the margin will do in this case.

4. Set off very carefully at each end of the line two spaces
of three-quarters of an inch each, giving the points, b, c, e, and/;
using the ruler as shown in fig. 91. Rule be and cf very
lightly.

5. Place the ruler on ad, and with the set-square draw the
vertical lines forming two rows of squares.

Note.— The pupils should follow the teacher step by step.

6. Now thicken in the pattern with a good firm line, ruling
the lines as directed. First the lines marked 1, then 2, next 3,

-jo The Teaching of Drawing

then 4, and complete by ruling 5. It is very important to insist
upon the ruling being done in this manner, as it secures rapidity
and uniformity, and the pattern will always be symmetrical at
each stage of the copy.

7. The pupils should now be shown that the pattern may
be continued to any length, and illustrations of its application
in the decoration of oilcloths, papers, carpets, stonework, &c,
given. The bottom half of the paper should now be filled
with the same pattern drawn to a different scale.

Notes.- 1. Many teachers prefer to rule the construction lines
in dotted line. This gives a very good appearance if the line is
carefully ruled with light and even strokes, as the pattern stands
out well from the construction. A very faijit line is much quicker,
and can probably be done better by the class as a whole.

2. No construction lines are to be removed, as the line of the
copy will be spoiled, and it is essential that the method of obtain-
ing the figure should be apparent. It is not advisable to give out
indiarubbers, except towards the end of the course, and then only
for the purpose of trimming up the copy if necessary.

3. The squares as a rule should not be of less than three-quarter
inch sides.

Figs. 246-259. — These are all based upon two lines of
squares.

The dotted lines show the necessary constructions, which
should be worked out in a similar manner to fig. 244. The
figures indicate the order of thickening in the pattern.

Figs. 260-270. — These figures are constructed upon three,
four, and five lines of squares, and can be easily followed
from the construction lines.

Figs. 271-281 are based on the square, rectangle, &c. The
dotted lines indicate the method of construction. Various
exercises of a similar character may easily be devised by the
teacher.

The copy without the construction lines should in all cases
be placed before the class, and the method of construction
elicited before beginning. The pupils should be taught to
measure up the copy, and as far as possible to enlarge the
various^ parts proportionately. For example, suppose it were

Standard III

mmy "■ TT-TI — n T-n" v~\ — \~~r~

I I I I I

lilt I I 1 . I

f

i 1

V

1 i

If

I 1/ I

The Teaching of Drawing

t

f

i

in

_J

Standard III

z

I 1

t

t '

1 I

The Teaching of Drawing

t \ i

i !. i

» XX 5 XX • NX » XiX • XIX XX XX

k~- XV T m XX "yrtv" ~~ XX* — 7 ""A — >dVv^"">TV~ X jfK xx I

L^-A-S.X ■ XjhJpi X^ - ' X-^r X x x^

X : X : X 1 X : X X X4 X X ■ X X2 X /z X

_ il

required to make fig. 275 half as large again ; then, if cd=2 inches
and tf£=half an inch, the pupil would make the dimensions
three inches and three-quarters of an inch respectively.

Figs. 271-276. — First draw the squares shown in dotted
line. Set off the distances marked ab from each angle. Rule
in the pattern with a good firm line,

Standard III

a, b

•j

a b

a b

y6 The Teaching of Drawing

Note. — In figs. 273 and 275 care must be taken to see that the
lines pass exactly through the centre.

Fig. 277. — Draw the diagonals and complete the square, and
then set off the distance ab from each angle.

Fig. 279. — This is rather difficult for children to see at first,
but if the teacher places the ruler on the copy and marks in
the dotted lines, they will at once perceive that the copy is
obtained by dividing each side of a square into three equal
parts and emphasizing portions of the lines.

Fig. 281. — Draw the diagonals and obtain the square as in
fig. 277. To obtain the middle points of each side of the
square, place the 450 set-square with its longest edge on the
side of the figure, as shown. Keep the ruler firmly in position,
and slip the set-square into the position shown by the dotted
lines, so that its longest edge is now on the centre of the square,
and mark in the points a and b. Reverse the set-square, still
keeping the ruler in its place, and obtain c and d.

Note. — This is a very important method, as when the square is
constructed from the diagonal the side cannot be bisected easily, as
its length is not known. It has also the advantage of being
quickly performed, and gives the pupils increased power in the use
of the set-square.

Triangles. — These are classified in two ways, either accord-
ing to their sides or to their angles. When named from their
sides they are called : —

1. Equilateral.— Three equal sides.

2. Isosceles. — Two equal sides.

3. Scalene. — All the sides unequal.

When named according to their angles they are called : —

1. Right-angled. — When one of the angles is a right
angle.

2. Acute-angled. — When each angle is less than a right
angle.

3. Obtuse-angled. — When one angle is greater than a right
angle.

Notes. — 1. These two ways of denoting triangles should be
frequently explained and defined.

Standard III

2. It will be quite sufficient for the pupils to test the size of
the angle with the set-square in determining whether it be a right
angle or not.

The terms base and apex or vertex should be explained.

The equilateral triangle, fig. 282.— Draw ab the required
size. Place the 6o° set-square on the ruler with the angle of
6o° at a, as shown by the light line, and draw ac. Keep the
ruler in position, reverse the set-square, and draw be. This is
much more expeditious and accurate than bisecting ab, drawing
a perpendicular, and cutting it with a distance equal to ab to
obtain the point e.

If the figure stands upon its angle, as in fig. 283, then place
the ruler and set-square as shown, and draw ab and ac as before.
Make ab and ac the required length, and join b with c.

d a c d

a, c o d a c

The isosceles triangle, figs. 284, 285, 286.— Draw the base

The Teaching of Drawing

ab and obtain the centre c. Set up the altitude to the required
height, and draw the sides.

The right-angled triangle will need no comment- It
might be pointed out that it may also be isosceles like the 450
set-square.

Zigzags. — Fig. 287 forms a good exercise on the equilateral
triangle. Draw two parallel lines a little wider apart than the

if

d

f

a

c

e

given copy. Mark point 0. Place the ruler on ac, and with
the 6o° set-square draw ab. Reverse the set-square and draw be,
then cd, de, ef, &c, reversing the set-square for each line.

Fig. 288. — This is another example of the same character.
Draw two parallels as before and obtain the single zigzag abedef

g, making ag

as in the last figure Now fix the position of

slightly larger than the copy. Draw gh with the set-square in

the same manner as ab, and complete the zigzag ghlmno as

before.

Standard III

The previous examples are based upon the equilateral
triangle. If, however, the lines are not drawn at an angle of
6o°, then vertical lines
should be drawn as in
fig. 289, and the zigzag
completed by drawing a
series of alternate dia-
gonals.

The Hexagon. — This
is a very important and

interesting figure, as so many pretty and useful exercises may
be based on it. It affords excellent practice with the set-
square, and will do more to accustom the pupil to ready mani-
pulation of this useful instrument than any other exercise.

I. Standing on its base, fig. 290. — Draw ab, say one and a-
half inches in length. Adjust the set-square as shown in position
A, and draw be. Place the set-square as in B and draw af.
Make be and af both equal to ab. With the ruler on ab slip
the set-square from A to point/ as shown by the dotted line, and

draw fe. Reverse the set-square and obtain cd. Make/? and cd
equal to ab. Join ^and e. Now let the pupils draw hexagons
of various sizes until the figures can be quickly and deftly con-
structed. If the required hexagon be a large one, then place
the ruler on af and obtain fe in the same manner that af was
obtained from ab, &c. In all cases it will be necessary for the
class to draw the figure line by line with the teacher, and a strict

80 The Teaching of Drazving

watch must be kept to see that each child always places his
set-square on the ruler.

Various diagonals, &c, may be drawn across the figure, form-
ing fresh exercises, as in figs. 291-293.

As an exercise in ingenuity the pupil may now be shown
how to complete the hexagon without measuring the sides, as
in fig. 294.

Draw ab of the required length.
Obtain be and ad with the set-
square. Reverse the set-square
and draw of and be. Place one
edge of the set-square on ab and
draw a line through o parallel to
ab, cutting off the sides of and be
equal to ab. From/ and c draw fe
and cd parallel to ad and be respec-
tively, and cutting the lines be and
ad in e and d. Join e with d.
II. When standing on an angle, fig. 295.— Mark the point a
and rule a faint line xy through it. With the ruler on the line,
and the set- square with its angle of 300 placed as shown,
draw ab and af the required length. Keep the ruler in its posi-
tion and draw be andy? at right angles to xy and equal to ab.
Draw ed and cd parallel to ab and af respectively by slipping the
set-square from its first position across to point e. If the set-
square be not large enough, then place the ruler on ec.

Fig. 296.— This is a common test, and if worked as shown,
from the hexagon, presents no difficulty whatever.

Standard III

The lesson should be given somewhat after the following
manner.

A drawing of the figure without any construction lines
should be placed before the class. If the pupils be each pro-
vided with a copy it will be advantageous.

i. How many points has the figure ? ' Six.''

If I join them, how many
sides will the figure have ?

What do we call a figure
with six sides ? ' A hexagon.'

Elicit illustrations, such as
nuts in machinery, bees'-cells,
patterns, &c.

2. Draw a hexagon roughly
on the board, and join the
alternate corners.

What figure is formed ?
1 An equilateral triangle.'

Why is it called equi-
lateral ?

Join the remaining corners. The pupils will now see that
the figure formed is the drawing required.

3. Measure the distance between a and b on the given copy,
and explain that as the drawing has to be a little larger each side

G

The Teaching of Drawing

of the hexagon must be enlarged. For example, if ab be one
and a-half inches on the copy, then on the drawing it should be
made about one and three-quarters of an inch or two inches in
length.

4. Draw xy and mark a point a in the centre.

Which angle of the set-square must be used ? ' The smallest?

Now, step by step, obtain the hexagon as in fig. 295, eliciting
the reason for each step. Join the alternate angles /, b, d,
giving the equilateral triangle fid. Complete the figure by
drawing the intersecting triangle ace.

Notes. — 1. Be careful to draw the hexagon either very faintly
or in dotted line.

2. Let the pupils draw exercises of different sizes until the
method is well understood.

The Octagon. — This forms an exercise in the use of the
450 set-square.

Draw ab one inch long. Arrange the set-square as shown
(A) : draw ^and ah> making each line one inch in length. Keep

I e

the ruler in position, and with the vertical edge of the set-square
draw cd and kg (B). Keep the ruler still on the base, and with
the sloping edge of the set-square draw gf and de. If the set-
square be not large enough, place the ruler on gd. Vertical
lines from a and b will determine the points / and e. Join /
with e.

Join the alternate corners as in fig. 298, and two intersecting
squares will be produced.

Standard III

The intersecting squares may, however, be more easily
obtained by the method shown in fig. 299.

1. Measure the diagonal ab on the copy, and decide upon
the size to which it should be enlarged. For example, if the
diagonal measured two inches, then three inches would be a
suitable size for the enlargement.

2. Draw the diagonals ab and ca\ and complete the square
adbc.

3. Place the set- square on ad and draw ef parallel to it.
Obtain gh in a similar manner. Make ef and gh equal to ab,
and draw the square egfh.

The Pentagon. — This figure cannot be drawn accurately
without the use of the compass or the protractor, and should
really not be set as a geometrical figure for this Standard, as
it cannot be correctly drawn with the ruler only. Various
mechanical devices have been given, none of which are very
satisfactory, as they are after all only approximations.

The most accurate device is to use the protractor, but as
this may not be readily obtainable the teacher can easily cut
out in paper angles of 1080, and use these to draw the angles
of the figure. The paper angle must be placed so that its edge
is exactly on the base ab with the angle of 1080 at b (fig. 300).
Place a little tick c to mark where the line has to be drawn.

G2

The Teaching of Drawing

Remove the paper and rule the line. Make the side equal to
ab. Place the paper at a and draw ae, then at e and draw ed,
Join d with c.

The proportions given on fig. 301 will give a sufficiently
accurate pentagon of a convenient size. Let ab = 2 in. Draw

cd perpendicular to ab from the middle point c, and make it
3 J inch long. Set off d? = i£ inch. Draw fg parallel to ab,
and. make ef and eg each = if inch. Draw af, bg, fd,
and gd.

Note. — In this case the pupils must have the proportions given
them.

CHAPTER VI

FREEHAND DRAWING. STANDARDS IV, V, VI, AND VII

If the methods of obtaining the proportions of the different
parts of the copy, and the drawing of the leading and the con-
taining lines have been well taught in Standard III on the
methods shown in figs. 203-231, the freehand drawing of the
higher standards becomes an easy and pleasant task. The
main points that will now require attention are : —

(1) Greater degree of difficulty in the examples.

(2) Increased power in analysing and blocking in the copy.

(3) More skill and finish in the lining in of the drawing.
And here I would again point out the necessity of strict atten-
tion being paid to the lining in. On no account must the
pupil be allowed to hurriedly blacken over the lines of the
drawing. A careful, clean sketch shows much better and more
artistic work than a carelessly lined in drawing. The primary-
object of lining in is to improve the shape, and to give finish
to the work.

It has been thought desirable to take the whole subject of
Freehand in one chapter, as it is quite impossible to divide the
subject into standards by any arbitrary rule. A selection of
suitable copies— including those given in the 'Illustrated
Syllabus,' and many that have been set as examination tests —
are appended for the teacher's guidance.

Sample lessons are also given, and those copies which illus-
trate important principles, or present special difficulties, are
shown in various stages to indicate the methods by which they
should be taught. In some cases the dotted lines are sufficient
to indicate the construction. The figures in all cases indicate
the order of drawing the lines.

86 The Teaching of Drawing

The following arrangement of the examples given is sug-
gested : —

Standard IV. — Figs. 302-329.
Standard V.— Figs. 330-356.
Standard VI. — Figs. 357-376.
Standard VII. — Figs. 377-383.

Standards VI and VII are frequently examined from cards
instead of large copies placed before the class, and practice
must therefore be given in both methods of testing. The
pupils when drawing from cards must never be allowed to draw
the example the same size as the copy. It should always be
either enlarged or reduced ; generally the instruction is to
make the copy fairly fill the paper.

The time taken for the drawing must be borne in mind,
especially towards the examination ; fairly rapid work should be
encouraged, but on no account must the pupils be allowed to
finish their drawings to time at the sacrifice of accuracy in the
shape. A portion well drawn and correctly planned is far more
valuable than an incorrectly finished exercise.

The following lesson indicates the way in which the
examples should be taught : —

(1) Place a drawing of the figure before the class, and pro-
ceed to question generally as to what it is called, what grows
like it, and ask for illustrations of its application in metal scroll
work of various kinds. Explain that the drawing is obtained
by selecting the important lines only of the object from which
the idea is taken ; the details and little irregularities are rejected,
not being suitable for the required purpose.

(2) Commence with the upright line and mark in the
middle point, as the half is very useful for purposes of compari-
son, even though no line may pass through it.

(3) Mark the point a where the bottom curve commences,
judging the distance with the eye. Find point b by measuring
with the eye and pencil.

Where is it? * A little above the half of the line?
What do we want to know next ? ' The position of
point c?

Standard IV

Find the width of the curve on the right and mark point d.

Is point e as far from the centre line as point d?

(4) After marking in point e proceed to draw the bottom
spiral, taking care to keep the curve continuous throughout.
The first time of drawing a spiral the pupils may, if thought
well, draw the dotted lines shown on fig". 303 as guides for
the curves. They should, however, be discarded afterwards, as

all aids of this character tend more or less to limit the pupil's
confidence and freedom in drawing bold curves.

(5) Draw the top spiral in a similar manner, first marking
in points g, h, /, m.

(6) Now show how the parts 1, 2, and 3 branch off from
the other lines. Notice that they form a continuous line with
the previous part of the curve as in A> not as in B (fig. 304).

The Teaching of Drawing

Attention must also be directed to the fact that the spiral
gradually decreases towards its centre, od is slightly less than

en, and bp less than od (fig. 302). This point may be easily
illustrated by rolling a piece of paper so as to form a spiral.

Standard IV

The TeacJiing of Drawing

Standard IV

The Teaching of Drawing

The Teaching of Drawing

Standard IV

The Teaching of Draiving

Standard IV

The Teaching of Draiving

Standard V 99

STANDARD V

The figures suggested for this Standard are arranged more
with reference to their form and the principles which they illus-
trate, than to the order in which it may be most desirable to
teach them. It will probably be found more interesting to
intermix the vases shown in figs. 332-338 with the other
copies, than to draw them in the order in which they are given.
These vases are v typical shapes, possessing great beauty of
contour, and are those which are most commonly used in model
drawing. They afford excellent practice in the drawing of bold,
symmetrical curves. As vases when placed in a vertical position
present a somewhat similar appearance to all the class, it will
be found to be of considerable assistance to the model drawing
if the pupils have previously practised the vases as freehand
exercises ; the same method of working being followed out in
both model and freehand.

Attention should be directed to the fact that all the vases
given are based on the oval — that is, one end of the body is
larger than the other, like an egg. This form gives a much more
elegant shape than either the circle or the ellipse would do.

The method of drawing is shown in stages and by the aid
of dotted lines. The following steps refer particularly to
fig. 334, but are also generally applicable to most vases.

1. Draw the centre line, ab.

2. Find the position c of the widest part of the vase.

3. Compare the greatest width with the height, and set it
out, de.

4. Draw the diameters of the mouth and foot of the vase,
fg and hk, comparing them with the greatest width, de.

5. Carefully sketch in the oval for the body, afterwards re-
moving the parts which are not needed.

6. Draw the ellipses for the mouth and foot.

7. Mark the narrowest part of the neck, ?m.

8. Draw the curve uniting the mouth with the body.

9. Suggest the thickness as shown in fig. 330. It will be
necessary to make enlarged drawings on the board of the details

h 2

IOO

The

Teaching of Drawing

connected with the mouths and feet of vases. For example, the
mouth of fig. 334 is suggested in the following manner. The
edge being rounded off, the thickness is only visible at each side.

The foot of fig. 338 should be drawn as in fig. 331. The
outer ellipse should be shown going behind the inner ellipse,
as in A, not like B or C.

Standard V

ioj

io2 The Tear] ling of Drawing

Standard V

104 The Teaching of Drawing

Fig. 339 is an excellent example for teaching from, as it
affords practice in analysing and blocking in a copy. It is
shown in three stages of development, and should be taught in
the following manner : —

i. Draw an upright line, ab.

2. Draw cd just below the point a.

3. Compare ed with ab.

4. After marking the position of c and d, fix the points /
and gt and draw the curves cf and dg.

5. Find the position of h and draw a line through it.

6. Mark the points / and m, comparing hi with ec.

7. Draw the curves from / and m, taking care to let them
run into (/and dg, so as to form a continuous curve from /to /
and from g to m.

The leading lines of the figure are now obtained, and the
drawings should be carefully examined before proceeding any
further. When this stage has been correctly drawn the pupils
may go to the stage marked B.

8. Mark the width of the middle leaf at its widest part, no.

9. Draw the middle vein, noticing that the point of the leaf
bends over to the right.

10. Draw the sides of the leaf, taking care to let the lines
run into cf and dg gradually.

11. Mark the width at^ and q, and draw the curve.

12. Draw the lines rs and tu at right angles to cf and dg,
and put in the top curves of the flower.

13. Unite / and m with the bottom curve as is shown on the
left hand side of fig. B. This is rather a difficult curve, and
requires great care.

14. The leading lines and masses of the figure being now
completed, the drawings should again be carefully examined,
after which the figure may be finished as in C.

15. Mark the position of v and w, and draw the short curve
first.

16. Draw the bottom curve of the flower as shown on the
left side of C.

17. Put in the stems and complete the figure.

Standard V

io6

The TeacJdng of Drawing

Standard V

io8

The Teaching of Drawing

Standard V

no

The Teaching of Drawing

Standard V

in

The Teaching of Draiving

Standard V

U4

The Teaching of Drazving

Standard V

US

u6

The Teaching of Drawing

STANDARD VI

Increased attention must be paid to the finish of the draw-
ing, as in this and the next Standard the work leads up to the
work required for the Elementary Drawing Certificate. If the
pupils have been well grounded through the previous standards,
they will now find no special difficulties here.

Standard VI

1 1 8 The Teaching of Drawing

The Teaching of Drawing

Standard VI

The Teaching of Drawing

The TeacJiing of Drawing

Standard VI

1 26 The Teaching of Drawing

Standard VI

The Teaching of Drawing

STANDARD VII

.The pupils should now have reached a stage of proficiency
requiring much less help from the teacher, and should them-
selves be able to apply the principles taught in the previous
standards. A few examples are given as an indication of the
character of the tests. Accuracy and finish should receive
great attention. Second Grade cards form very suitable
examples for the work of this Standard.

Standard VII

The Teaching of Drawing

Standard VII

K 2

132 The Teaching of Drazving

Fig. 382. — Attention is here directed to the method of ob-
taining the flutes on curved surfaces. As the pupils will have
done some solid geometry, they will easily understand the way
in which this common form of decoration is obtained. The
semicircle shows half the plan of the vase at the top of the
fluted part. If the semicircle be divided into as many equal
portions as there are flutes required, ard projectors drawn as
shown, the correct widths for the flutes will be obtained. The
left hand side shows the necessary construction.

Figs. 383 and 372 show a small piece of foliage, and indi-
cate the way in which the plant should be drawn from nature.
The method of obtaining the serrated edges is shown on the
bottom leaf of the laurel in fig. 383, half being left plain to
show the way in which the leaves should be sketched. The
veins should be kept light and delicate, gradually dying away
as they approach the edge of the leaf.

Standard VTT

1 34 The Teaching of Drawing

CHAPTER VII

SCALE DRAWING. STANDARD IV

Syllabus.— Simple scales and draiving to scale.

Drawing to scale will be limited to the following subjects : —

To draw and take dimensions from a scale of feet and
inches.

To draw a plan or other figure on squared paper from a
sketch having dimensions marked on it.

To enlarge or reduce plane figures to scale.

These requirements may be conveniently divided into four
parts.

i. The measurement and drawing of lines, and the con-
struction and use of scales.

2. The drawing of objects to various given scales on plain
paper.

3. The drawing of objects on squared paper.

4. The enlarging and reducing of given drawings.

The apparatus necessary for the teacher will be : large set-
squares 450 and 6o°, a 3 ft. slip or T-square marked in inches
as in Standards I and II, and a blackboard squared on one
side with red lines one inch apart.

The pupils will require plain drawing books or paper 1 1 by
7J inches, set-squares, indiarubber, &c, as in the previous
standards, and in addition squared paper ruled very faintly
with lines one-eighth of an inch apart. If every fifth line be
ruled heavier it is of considerable assistance in counting.

An H pencil.

A 9-inch ruler marked with twelfths and eighths.

Scale Drawing.

Standard IV

The following diagram represents a convenient scale ruler for
this subject. Ordinary rulers, such as are used for arithmetic,
&c., are not very suitable, as the edges get notched -and the
divisions obscured by ink. Good hard-wood scales may now be
obtained very cheaply. The teacher will find it better to keep
a set purposely for scale work. It is not advisable to procure
any scales that are not properly figured. The first unit on the

scale ought always to be marked zero (o), as distances can then be
measured from it without fear of mistake. Suppose, for exam-
ple, the distance of 2 ft. 7 in. is required to be set off to a scale
of one inch to a foot, then the space marked AB (from the 2
to the 7), fig. 384, will be the required distance. In the same
manner other distances may be marked off directly ; 5 ft. 9 in.
would be represented by the distance between 5 and 9 on the
scale. On an ordinary ruler the pupil would have to calculate
the distance by counting up the inches and parts.

Compasses.— If thought desirable, a pair of compasses or
dividers may be used. They are not, however, necessary for
this Standard, as all the dimensions can be more accurately
taken by the pupils from the scale ruler.

In giving a lesson the teacher should in all cases have either
the object to be drawn or a drawing of it before the class. This
subject is a valuable means of stimulating general intelligence,
and is always popular with children, as its practical application
is so apparent to them.

The subject will be treated in the four sections mentioned
at the beginning of the chapter, but the construction of plain
scales should not be attempted until the pupils have obtained
a thorough mastery of their instruments. The easiest plan is
to commence with sections two and three — that is, the drawing
of objects to scale on plain paper, and the exercises on squared
paper— working the two concurrently.

The Teaching of Drawing

Introductory Lesson. — 1. Refer to Standard I geography,
where the pupils have already acquired the idea of representing
long lines by taking shorter units, when drawing plans of the
room, school, &c, and illustrate this by plans, maps, &c, drawn
to various scales. Explain that this is ' Drawing to Scale,' and
show that it is not only necessary to draw large objects to a
smaller scale, but in the case of small objects— such as the
parts of a small instrument or the wheels of a watch--it would
be necessary to make the drawing to a larger scale.

2. Give mental exercises on the repre-
sentation of lines of various lengths to
different scales, such as : —

If the door be eight feet high, how long
will the line be to represent it, if one inch
stands for one foot 7

If half an inch and two inches
respectively represent one foot, how long
then ?

3. Measure up the outline of some
simple object, such as a door or window,
make a rough dimensioned sketch on a
corner of the board, as in figure 385, and
from this draw to a scale of 1" to i' ov.

4. Explain the method of representing
the dimensions ; that feet are represented

by ('), and inches by ("), and that 3' 6" reads 3 feet 6 inches.
The 8' o" in fig. 385 represents the distance between the
arrowheads a and b, and the 3' 6" between the arrowheads
c and d.

5. Commence with the base line.

How long is it ? ' Three feet six inches.''

What distance niust be taken to represent it if the scale be
one inch to one foot ? ' Three inches and six- twelfths'

Then set off from your rulers from the three inches to the
six- twelfths.

How high is the door?

What distance shall we mark off from the ruler ? ' From
o to 8.'

Scale Drawing. Standard IV 137

What kind of an angle do the1 sides make with the bottom
of the door ? ' A right angle?

How, then, must the sides be drawn ? ' With the set-
square'

6. After the outline of the door is completed, draw it again
to a scale of two inches to one foot, and if time permits to a
scale of half an inch to one foot.

Show that the three drawings represent the same object,
and that the relative proportions of the parts are maintained
in each.

This should be followed by the measuring up and draw-
ing of a window or some such object in a similar manner to
the previous one.

x* The pupils will then have a clear understanding of what
drawing to scale- really means, and will readily comprehend the
reasons for the various processes which follow.

Note. — The teacher will mark arbitrary divisions on his ruler
to represent inches, such as 4 in. to stand for 1 in. It is a very
useful plan to mark the ruler so as to correspond with the pupil's
ruler ; each line that the teacher measures will then correspond
exactly with that measured by the pupils.

As this book is intended for the teacher's use, the section
dealing with the construction and use of scales, although the
most difficult, is taken first, as it is essential that the teacher
should thoroughly understand the principles upon which scales
are constructed and the method of using them before teaching
the subject.

SECTION I

The construction of simple scales. — The scales required in
this Standard are what are known as plain scales — that is, scales
showing equal divisions —and from them we get two dimensions
such as feet and inches, or miles and furlongs, &c.

Before constructing any scales, explain that the scale is used to
measure distances on the drawing, and illustrate this by measuring
on plans and maps from the scales given on them. As scales
are perfectly useless unless accurate, very great care should be

n8

TJie Teaching of Drazving

fa ^

taken in their construction ; a sharp pencil should be used, and
the divisions marked off with exactness. This is about the
most difficult operation that has to be done in this Standard.
« The method to be adopted will be best

seen from the following example : —

Construct a scale of i inch to ifoot, show-
ing feet and inches, long enough to measure
4 feet. From this scale draw a line 2 //.
9 in. long.

1. Ascertain how long the line must be
that will represent 4 feet.

2. Draw a line 4 inches long, and mark
the inch divisions on it from the ruler.

3. Rule the parallel line above it and
' about one-twelfth of an inch from it, and very

carefully mark in the short vertical lines
fjhowing the divisions.

4. Figure the scale as shown, and be
careful to insist upon the first division being
marked zero (o).

5. Explain that we have now marked
the units. (If 1 inch represents 1 foot,
then the inch is the unit.) The sub-divisions
of the unit will be shown on the left hand
side of the (o).

6. Now if 1 inch represents 1 foot,
what distance will represent 1 inch ? ■ One-
Hvelfth:

Take the end of the ruler which is
divided into twelfths, place it carefully on
the first division, and mark in first the
half-inch, then the quarters, and afterwards the twelfths.

Note. —Be careful to insist upon the vertical lines being ruled.
This may be done with the set-square if thought desirable. For the
first exercise it will probably be sufficient to mark in the quarters only.

Os

isM

7. Figure the sub divisions 3, 6,
right and inches at the left.

9, 12, and print feet at the

Scale Drazving. Standard IV 139

8. Write under the drawing ' Scale=i" to 1' o".'

9. Explain and show the advantage of figuring the first
division (o) by the second part of the question, viz : — ' to draw
a line 2 ft. 9 in. long' The pupils will see that from the 2 to the
9 is the distance required, and that when the scale is correctly
numbered, the figures will always indicate the distance. Let
the pupils come out to the board and show other distances
thus : — 3 ft 7 in., the right-hand forefinger on the 3 and the
left-hand finger on the 7, &c.

10. Thicken in the bottom line and every alternate division
for the sake of clearness.

The representative fraction should be explained, as it helps
to a better understanding of the subject.

If 1 inch stands for 1 foot how much smaller is the line
drawn than its actual size ? ' One-twelfth of the real size.'

Then TV is the representative fraction, and shows that the
real object is twelve times larger than the drawing of it.

If half an inch represents 1 foot what is the representative

. _ \ inch 1 inch 1

fraction? *-e - = —«-. — , — as —

1 loot 12 inches 24

If 1 inch stands for 1 yard, what is the fraction?
1 inch 1

36 inches ~" 36'

Other similar questions will easily make this point clear.

Scales of two inches , half an inch, and one and a- half inches
to the foot should now be drawn, as shoivn in figs. 387, 388,

Note. — The eighths of an inch will give the twelve sub-divisions
for the scale of \\" to i' o."

A variety of ways in which these problems may be set are
given, and should be frequently and carefully practised.

Fig. 390. — Construct a scale of three-quarters of an inch to
one yard, to show 5 yards 1 foot.

What is the unit? ' Three-quarters of an inch.'

What does it stand for? * One yard.'

If the scale is to measure 5 yards 1 foot, how many units
must be set off? 'Six.'

« CM

r!

^c

Ot

o CM

I
I
I
I
I
I

The Teaching of Drawing

i

so

o

oo

ftj

II

C/l

rO

«o

I

ft J

o

<r> CM

£ O

"O

Scale Drawing. Standard IV

How long will the line

•Orn

be ? ' 6 inches
inches'

Rule a line

x j i?ich=^\

inches

long, and set off on it six
spaces of three-quarters of
an inch each.

Note.— These dimensions
may, of course, be set off with
the dividers, if preferred. Our
own experience is that they
are not necessary, and that
the pupils mark off the divi-
sions more accurately and
quickly from their rulers.

Figure the scale and
write yards at the right hand.

If three-quarters of an
inch represents 1 yard,
what will represent 1
foot ? ' A quarter of an
inch'

Mark in and figure the
Sub-divisions, and complete
the scale.

Now indicate the dis-
tance required, 5 yards 1
foot, as shown above.

Fig. 391. — Draw a
scale of 5 ft. 7 in. to a scale
of 1" to i' o".

Fig. 392. — Draw a
scale 0/2! 6" showing inches.
Let 1 \ inches stand for 1
foot.

Fig. 393. — Draw a
scate to measure 5 miles,
showing furlongs. Let 1
inch represent 1 mile.

<o

a cvj

^O

Ch

?M

rO

^o

CM

H£

I
I

142 The Teaching of Draiving

Notice that the end of the ruler marked with eighths will give
the furlongs.

The following exercises, most of which have been set for
examination, should now be worked.

i. Draw a scale of 1" to i' o" and draw from it a line 3' 4"
long.

2. Construct a scale of half an inch to one foot, and drazv a
line from it 3 ft. 6 in. long.

3. Draw a scale of one and a-half inches to one foot, and
show on it 2 ft. 2 in.

4. Draw a scale of % ft. 3 in. Let two feet be represented by
one inch.

5. Draw a scale of two inches to one foot, and mark off a dis-
tance showing 2 feet 3 inches.

6. If two and a quarter inches represent a longer line on a
scale of one inch to one foot, what is the actual length of the line
represented ?

SECTION II

The drawing of objects to scale on plain paper. — This
naturally follows the construction of scales.

A dimensioned sketch of the object must be placed before
the class, as in fig. 394.

Commence with the base line, first ascertaining its length.
Complete the rectangle abed. Set off af and de each four
twelfths (o to 4), and rule the lines eg and fh with the set-square.
This is preferable to setting off the measurement on each side,
as time is saved and dexterity in manipulation acquired. These
lines should be either dotted or ruled with a very light line.

The points / and ;;/ must now be found, de + Im -\-fa = 1 foot.

Then el -(- mf=i foot 6 inches, and el=g inches.

Set off el and /;;/ each nine-twelfths and draw A? and ;;//
with the set-square as before, making them the required length.
Set off fq four-twelfths, and complete the figure by carefully
thickening in the outline.

Ail construction lines must be left in to show the method of
procedure ; hence the necessity for fine lines.

Scale Drawing. Standard IV

The figure when finished should stand out boldly from the
construction lines.

Note. — The pupils should be shown how to obtain the dimensions
of the parts which are not figured. For instance, in fig. 394, 4 in.
is only given once, as it is evident at a glance that the other widths
are the same ; again, el is easily found from the other given
dimensions.

d C

T

i

o 1

I !

1 j

CVJ

I

I

Scale = 1" to i' o".

A few typical examples are given to illustrate the methods
of treating the figures ; for additional exercises the ordinary
books, such as ' Longman's Drawing to Scale ' {2d.) will furnish
an abundance of suitable examples.

Generally speaking, the bulk of the figures may be solved
either by enclosing the figure in a rectangle, as in fig. 394, or
working from a centre line. If the sides of the figure are
inclined to one another, one of these two plans must be adopted.
As a rule, working from a centre line is the neatest and
most workmanlike method. In the following examples the
construction lines are dotted, and show the method of work.
Explanations are also given where thought necessary.

he J

ea

ch

trig

of L

)r

azvmg

^ f

K i

-i-V

*CZ

fO\

vO

CVJ

a

Scale = t" to i' o"

Scale

J

e

c

Hi

cu b

t 1

i
i

a

"O

Scale = 1" to 1' 0".

Scale = 2" to 1' 0".

b

Fig. 395. — Draw the vertical line 2| inches long. Set off 1
inch from the top and set out the horizontal line with the set-
square. Make each side -^ inch and complete the figure.

Fig. 396. — Draw the top line. Set off 2$ inches and draw
ab. Complete the top, set off -^ inch from each end, and
with the set-square draw the outer lines of the legs. The
completion is now easy.

Fig. 397.— Draw the box first. For the lid set off ad and erect
aperpendicular. To get the thickness of the lid, place the ruler
on cd and draw perpendiculars at c and d with the set-square.

Fig. 398.— Draw ab 2\ inches long. At a draw the perpen-
dicular ac 4 inches. Set off 1 'inch from the top and with the set-
square draw de parallel to ab. At b erect a perpendicular. Draw
/parallel to de. The rest of the figure presents no difficulty.

Scale Drawing. Standard IV

«fw

T r

u£

<c

Scale = 3" to 1' o".

Scale = 1" to 1' o".

Fig. 399. — Draw ab. Set off 2§ inches and draw the dotted
line at the top. Set off \ inch for the lines at c and d, and draw
them parallel to ab. For the line at e set off £ inch (i| inches
=^ foot). For the palings set off distances of T\ inch.

Fig. 400. — Draw ab 2^ inches long. (A scale of 3" to 1' o"
is a scale of j, so that each line will be \ of its real size.) Find
the centre c, and draw cd \\ inches long. Draw ef parallel to
ab, and make de and df each \ inch. Draw ea and /^. To
obtain bg, produce ab and make the produced part 2 inches
long. Draw kg perpendicular to M, and complete.

Fig. 401. — Draw ab 3 inches long, and at the centre c draw
the perpendicular cd = 7 inches. Through */ draw ef. Draw <w
and <£/• The rest of the figure is easily followed. The width
of the rails must be set off on the centre line, and not on the
oblique sides of the easel.

The Teaching of Drawing

J 1

Scale

[ l" to i' o'

Scale = 2" to i'o'

Figr. 402. —This

figure requires very care-
ful drawing. Begin with
the line ab 3/0 inches
long. Draw the centre
line cd, on it set off
1 {% inches, and draw
the line ef, parallel to ah
and equal to it. Set off
1 T\ inches on the centre
line above ef, and drawdfe
and df Set off ^ inches
from a and b, and rule in
the sides. For the holes
draw a horizontal line T82 inch above ab, set off the width, and draw
the vertical lines 5 the lines to g, &c, are obtained with the 450
set-square. For the thickness of the roof, draw lines at e and /at
right angles to ed and df, on these lines set off the thickness, and
rule the lines parallel to ^and ^ with the set-square. The width
of the struts must be obtained in the same, manner. Draw hi.
At h draw a perpendicular, and on this set off yV inch.

Note. — This is a very important point. The pupils should be
shown why the thickness must be set off at right angles to the
side, and not on the vertical nor horizontal lines.

Fig. 403. — The sketches given are not always drawn to scale j
the pupil should be taught to draw from the figured dimen-
sions, and must not necessarily expect the drawing to look
like the sketch given in the question. In this figure first draw
the rectangle shown in dotted lines, and set off the distances
from each corner. The length and breadth must first be
calculated from the dimensions given.

Scale Drawing.

Standard IV

H7

SECTION III

Drawing on squared paper. — This is the easiest portion of
the course, and is on that account frequently taken before the
other sections. It only requires accurate counting and care in
ruling. The following example will illustrate the proper method
of working.

Draw the given figure on squared paper. Let the side of
each square represent half an inch.

1. First count up the greatest length and breadth of the
figure, so that it may be placed to advantage on the squared
paper and not crammed into a corner. The given figure is
\o\ inches by 8^ inches, and will therefore require 21 squares
in one direction and 17 in the other.

a o

2. Count about 20 or 25 lines from the top of the paper, and
mark the points a and b with small dots 12 squares apart and
about equidistant from the centre of the space in which the draw-
ing is to be placed, as in fig. 405. In the same manner indicate
the points c and d, and rule in the rectangle abed with a. firm bold
line, so that the drawing stands out well from the chequered lines.

This is much better than marking the whole figure in with dots
before ruling, as when a line is ruled in, the position of the lines
adjoining it can be more readily fixed. The dots must on no account
be made large, or they will show after the lines are ruled.

l 2

The Teaching of Drawing

3. Obtain e andyj and rule in.

4. The points m and / are obtained as follows : — gh
2 inches + £ inch + J inch = 3 inches. Therefore dm
1 inch. Complete the right hand side.

i

r

S

I

v\

c

X

d

P

h

n

I

c

a

b

5. Find the middle (x) of cd and mark in/ and ^, each two
squares from the centre. Count up 7 squares from x and
mark the points r and s. Rule in qs and fir, dotting the upper
portion. From r count 4 squares and rule in st. Mark u and
rule z/z>. Join v with 5-. Notice that V is not at the corner of a
square. The figure when completed should show a clear bold
line of uniform thickness throughout.

The same plan must be followed out with regard to the
following examples, always taking care to estimate the size and
position of the figure on the paper before starting. India-
rubbers should not be used at all.

Note. — The plain paper examples may be used as exercises for
the squared paper, and vice versa.

Scale Drawing. Standard IV

rO

C\J

I

I

a *

Fig. 406. — Let the side of each square equal 2 inches.

Fig. 407.— Let the side of each square represent 3 inches.
First obtain ab and the two side lines ac and bd. From the
centre of ab count up 14 squares, and mark f. This point
will fall on the middle of the side of the square, and must be
carefully marked. The rest of the figure presents no difficulty.

Fig. 408 —Let the side of each square represent 1 inch. Mark
in abed, 20 squares by one square. Find the centre, and mark
point e, 20 squares above. Mark points /and g over a and b.

Fig. 409. — Let the side of each square equal 1 inch.
Draw ab, and get the centre line. Notice that the bottom of
the handle will come to the middle of the side of the square.

The Teaching of I) rawing

Fig. 410. — Let the side of each square represent 2 inches.
Draw the beam at the top 24 squares by 2 squares. Fix the
position and width of the posts, count 48 squares down, and
rule the ground line and posts. Now mark the position of
the ropes at the top. To obtain the seat, count 10 squares
up from the ground and 3 squares from each post, and rule
in the bottom line. Complete the seat, and mark one square
from each end for the position of the ropes. Notice that the
ropes are not vertical.

Fig. 411. — Let the side of each square represent 2 inches.
Fix the point a in the centre of the base, and draw the bottom
part of the figure. Count up 42 squares from a, and from this
point set out 8 squares on each side of the centre line, giving
points b and c. For d, count 8 squares above be, rule in bd
and cd, and complete the roof. Mark points e and /, and
complete the opening. For the point g set off 6 squares on
each side of ;;/. Draw the sloping sides.

Scale Dr diving. Standard IV

SECTION IV

Enlarging or reducing a given figure. — In enlarging
and reducing simple figures it will be found much neater and
easier to teach the pupil to measure the lines with the scale,
and then calculate the required length, rather than to measure
or divide by means of compasses or dividers. Suppose, for ex-
ample, it is required to draw a rectangle with its sides half as
long as those of the given figure. Instead of bisecting, let the
pupil measure each of the sides. He will find them 2\ inches
and 1^ inches respectively, and will at once know that the
required figure will have sides of ij inches and | inch.

As a general rule it will be found that most figures will
scale, and their dimensions can be readily calculated. Small
dimensions can neither be correctly divided nor accurately set
off by children with ordinary compasses.

The following lesson will illustrate the method suggested
above : —

Draw the bell 'tent (fig. 413), making the lines three times as
long as those of the given figure.

1. Commence by drawing the base line of indefinite length,
and mark in the point a and the centre line am.

2. Now place the ruler on the base line, and measure ab.
Suppose it to scale § inch, then the pupil will set off 2\ inches
on each side of the centre.

The Teaching of Drazving

Note. — The proper method of doing this must be explained
clearly. If the distance be less than i inch, then place the o of the
scale on a and read off to the left. If over i inch and less than
2 inches, then place i on a and read off as before. If over 2 inches
and less than 3 inches, place 2 on a, &c.

3. Measure bd. Suppose it to scale y^ inch, then
inch = 2 inches must be set off. Draw bd and ce at

right angles to be, and complete the rectangle bced.

4. Scale bfi set off thrice the distance, and draw//$ and gl.

Note. — It is better to scale the longer distance bf than the
shorter distance af, as the measurement is likely to be more
accurate.

5. Measure am. If it measures i£ inches, then the pupil
will set off 4.5 inches. Draw dm and em.

6. With the set-square draw hn and In, parallel to the lines
dm and em respectively.

The figure should be carefully thickened in, and all the con-
struction lines left either dotted or very thin. The pupils should
be taught to thicken in lines like bd, dm,fh, &c, when first ruled,
as it saves time and is likely to produce neater work.

Fig. 414 — Draw the given figure ivith lines three times the
given size.

Find the dimensions as in the previous figure,

Scale Drazving. Standard IV

1. First draw abed, then the chimney.
2-. Find position of e, and draw ef parallel to cd with the set-
square. Joiny?.

3. Measure up and draw the door.

4. The window must be obtained as shown by the dotted
construction lines. Measure nh and set it off at g. Now
measure nm, and set off at /. From g and / draw lines parallel
to ab. Measure gh, set it off, and rule a perpendicular hm.
Obtain the other side of the window in a similar manner.

a

Fig. 415. — Draw the figure with lines half the size of those
given.

I. Begin with line bc> and then rule the centre
line ad.

The Teacliing of Drawing

2. If ab equals if inches, then the pupil will set off | inch
on each side of a.

3. Complete the rectangle beef.

4. Measure ad, set off half the distance, and complete the
figure.

Examination Tests

Two papers are given to show the character of the tests the
children may expect There are usually two problems to be
drawn, and great attention should be given to the proper
arrangement of the examples so as to show to advantage on
the paper.

Test-paper A (to be tvorked on plain paper)

1. Draw a scale of 1^ inches to 1 foot, and from it draw a
line to represent 2 ft. 4 in.

2. Draw figure 416 with lines twice the length of those

/I

Scale Draiving. Standard IV

Test-paper B (to be ivorked on squared paper)
i. Draw fig. 417 from the given dimensions, letting the

side of each square equal 1 inch.

2. Draw fig. 418 from the given dimensions, letting the

side of each square equal 3 inches.

I

V 1

ft *

J,

i

K)

T

to

- t

I
t

I

t

J

I

~T

o

CM

J

56 The Teaching of Drawing

CHAPTER VIII

PLANE GEOMETRY. STANDARDS V AND VII

Syllabus, Standard V. — Geonietrical figures with instru-
ments and to scale.

This section will include such problems as the division of
a given line into a number of equal parts by trial with the
dividers, and also by construction ; the drawing of lines parallel
and perpendicular to given lines by means of the set-squares, and
also by construction ; the construction of an equilateral triangle
or a square of a given side ; the construction of an angle equal
to a given angle ; the bisection of a given angle ; the construction
of a triangle, its sides or its sides and angles being given.

Apparatus. — The teacher will require a pair of large chalk
compasses about 15 inches in length, in addition to the appa-
ratus necessary for Standard IV.

The pupils will require the same material as for Standard
IV, with the addition of pencil compasses. Where expense is
no object small dividers are very useful for dividing lines and
taking off measurements, but they are not essential.

Compasses. — These should be as good as can be obtained,
as it is utterly impossible to expect that children can do neat
and accurate work with the wretched instruments that are com-
monly supplied to schools. It is not desirable that very deli-
cate or expensive instruments should be supplied, as they are
very liable to be soon damaged. The best cheap compass with
which we are acquainted is known as ' Harris's Patent,' fig.
419. It is strongly made, with a good point, and does not
get out of order easily, the pencil being held firmly by a
screw collar which envelops both jaws. Pencils can be bought
to fit the compasses, and should be sharpened so as to form a
chisel point, as this lasts longer and gives a much better line.

Plane Geometry. Standard V 157

The figure to be drawn should be ruled in firmly, so as to
show out well from the construction lines, ivhich must not be
rubbed out, and should be ruled in either with a very light or
dotted line. For children probably a fine continuous line is
preferable, as it is more quickly done. Dotted lines do not

look well unless the dots are kept very even, and to do this
takes a much longer time. The page should always be divided
by ruled lines into spaces, so that each problem is kept dis-
tinctly to itself, and the figure should be worked as large as
the space will allow. It will be necessary for the teacher to
watch carefully the method of holding the compass, and to
insist upon it being held nearly upright and between the thumb
and forefinger, as the proper method of using the instruments
is an important factor towards obtaining successful work.

The course required for Standard V embraces the follow-
ing points. Elementary constructions relating to : — (1) Lines.
(2) The drawing of perpendiculars and parallels. (3) Angles.
(4) The construction of triangles of various kinds. (5) The
square, the rectangle, and the circle. Definitions must be fre-
quently given, in order that the pupil may thoroughly com-
prehend the questions set. It is not advisable to attempt to
learn these definitions by heart ; frequent questioning and
illustration will soon enable the class to explain the terms used.
The theory of construction and the uses of the different in-
struments must also be carefully and frequently explained.

The following course amply covers the requirements, and
most of the figures will explain themselves. Notes are only
given where specially needed. Attention is again directed
to the necessity of drawing the figures large, in a variety of
positions, and of forming numerous exercises from them. A
few examination cards are given at the end, which should be
arranged upon the paper as directed. Longman's ' Practical

I 5 8 The Teaching of Drazving

Geometry for Standard V ' will furnish the teacher with a
variety of exercises.

The following problem is worked out fully as an illustra-
tion of the points which should be dealt with in a lesson : —

From a given point A, draw a line which shall meet the
line BC at an angle equal to the given angle D.

i Draw two parallel lines on the board with the set-square.
Place the 6o° set-square as shown in fig. 421, and draw a line
ad cutting both the parallel lines. Apply the set-square to the
angle at b, and direct the attention of the pupils to the fact that
it exactly fits, and therefore the alternate angles must be equal.

Draw another line with the 45° set-square, and show that there is
the same result. Now draw two converging lines, and show that
the alternate angles are no longer equal. (Explain ' alternate.')

2. Through A draw AE parallel to BC

3. At A make an angle equal to T>, and produce the line
to meet BC in F.

4. The angle AFC equals the angle FAF, as has been
previously shown, and FAF wa.s constructed equal to D, there-
fore AFC must be equal to D, and AF is the required line.

This is a difficult problem for children, and should be
reasoned out as shown above. The parallel line may also be
obtained by using the set-square.

Plane Geometry. Standard V

A

V

Figs. 422 and 423.— To bisect lines.

Be careful to see that the bisecting line goes exactly through
the intersection of the arcs, and that the arcs are kept equal
in length.

Figs. 424 and 425. — To erect a perpendicular from a point
in a given line.

The method in fig. 422 should be used when the point is near
the middle of the line, as it is neater and more quickly performed.

Figs. 426 and 427.— -7b drop a perpendicular from a point
without a given line.

The method in fig. 425 is for use when the point is nearly
over the end of the line. It can also be used for fig. 426.

Fig. 428. — To draw a line parallel to a given line at a given
distance from it.

Fig. 429. — To drawa line parallel to a given line through
a given point.

Fig. 430. — Draw a line parallel ti AB through the point C,
and on the opposite side of AB draw another line parallel to
it and \\ inches from it.

Notes. — 1. All these perpendiculars and parallels should also
be obtained by the use of the set-square.

2. Definitions of the terms 'bisection,' 'intersection,' 'perpen-
dicular,' ' parallel ' and ' arc ' should be given here.

i6o

The Teaching of Drawing

Fig". 431. — To construct an angle equal to a given angle.

Fig. 432. — To bisect a given angle.

Fig. 433.— To divide a given angle into four equai parts.

Fig. 434. — To trisect a right angle.

Fig. 435. — To draw a line that would bisect the angle be-
tiveen two converging lines without producing the lines.

Draw lines parallel to the converging lines and at equal
distances from them, as in fig. 428, and bisect the angle thus
formed.

Fig. 436. — Find a point in a given line equally distant from
the tivo given points A and B.

Fig. 437.-20 draw a line from the point A to meet BC, and
make an angle with it equal to D.

Figs. 438 and 439. — To divide a line into any number of
equal parts. Say five.

The pupils should be conversant with both methods, but
the method shown in fig. 439 by using the set-square is the
most important, as it is the one in practical use.

Plane Geometry. Standard V

Construction of angles when their size is given in
degrees. — Describe a circle, and show that the radius will go
exactly six times round it. The explanation of a degree is
given on page 47, and should be recapitulated here. If the circle
contains 3600, then each of the sixths into which it has been
divided must equal 6o°. Most of the other common angles can
be obtained from the angle of 6o°.

Figs. 440-448.— To construct angles of 6o°, 1200, 30°, 150,

These may be easily followed from the constructions, and

most of them can also be obtained by using the set-squares.

The angle of 30°+ the angle of 450 will give 750, &c.

Triangles. — These have previously been defined and ex-
plained in Standard III, and will now only need recapitulating.

The number of degrees in the various angles will require
constant practice, and the pupils must be well drilled in the
fact that the three ang/es of any triangle contain 1800. Plenty
of examples should be given, such as, when two angles are
given to find the third, and, in the case of an isosceles triangle,
when the vertical angle is given to find the base angles.

M

The Teaching of Drawing

Fig. 449.— 71? construct an equilateral triangle on a given base.

Fig. 450. — To cofistruct an equilateral triangle, its altitude being
given. Draw the base line first, perpendicular to the altitude.

Fig. 451. — To construct an isosceles triangle, the base and
altitude being given.

% Fig. 452. — To construct an isosceles triangle, the base and side
being given.

Fig. 453. — To construct a triangle, its three sides being given.

Fig. 454. — To construct a triangle, its base and base angles
being given.

Fig. 455. — To construct a triangle similar to a given triangle.

Fig. 456.— To construct an isosceles triangle having its base
and vertical angle given.

This depends upon the previous problem, and is more
easily understood when worked as shown. Convert the given
angle c into an isosceles triangle by making its two sides equal
and joining them. At a and b construct angles equal to the
base angles of c. Then the vertical angle d must be equal to c.

This problem should be practised a number of times until
thoroughly understood.

Fig. 457. — Construct a triangle having a base of 3 feet and
two angles of 6o° and 45 ° respectively. What is the size of the re-
maining angle ? Scale-

inch to 1 foot. [1S00 - (6o° + 45°) = 75°].

Plane Geometry. Standard V

Fig. 458.— 71? construct an isosceles triangle with a vertical
angle of 300 and a base 0/ 1 inch. What is the size of the base
angle ?

Construct an angle of 30°, convert it into an isosceles
triangle, and then proceed as in fig. 456.

Note. — Practise this problem with a variety of vertical angles,
and notice that to construct an isosceles triangle having base angles
of 750 is only another way of wording the above.

Fig. 459. — To construct an isosceles triangle on a given base
and having its base angles 300.

It is only necessary to construct one angle, the other is
more easily measured from the angle already obtained.

Fig. 460.— To construct a square on a given base.

Fig. 461. — To construct a square on a given diagonal.

Fig. 462.— To construct a rectangle, its two sides being given.

Fig. 463. — To construct a rhombus, having a side and an
angle given.

The circle. — The various parts should be defined and ex-
plained, such as centre, circumference, radius, diameter, chord.

Fig. 465. — To find the centre of a given circle.

Fig. 466. — To complete the circle of which AB is a portion*

m 2

The Teaching of Drawing

In the following card the problems should be arranged as
indicated below.

Card I.— 1. Copy the angle ABC, and through D draiv a
line parallel to AB,

'C

2. Draw tivo right lines each 2 feet long to meet at an angle
of go0. Scale=i\" to i' o".

3. Describe two circles touching each other with diameters of
1 inch and 1^ inches respectively.

1. To copy the angle, first measure AB. Take BC as
radius and describe an arc. Intersect this arc with the dis-
tance A C. This method is necessary, as no marks must be
made on the cards.

2. As the scale is i%" to 1' o", each line will be 2 J inches
long.

3. Draw a line and set off the diameters. Find the centre
of each diameter and describe the circles. Be careful to see
that the circles touch one another.

Note.— If radii of I inch and f inch had been set off, the same
result would have been obtained.

Plane Geometry, Standard V

Card II. — 1. Copy the given triangle, and bisect an angle and
a side.

2. Construct a triangle having its base i\ inches, and its
angles 45 °, 45 ° and 900.

3. Construct an equilateral triangle of 2 feet sides. Scale
= i£" to i' o".

Card III. — 1. Copy the given line AB and the point C, and
through C draiv a line parallel to AB.

2. Construct a right angle, and bisect it.

3. Make an isosceles triangle, base 2 inches and angle oppo-
site the base 45 °.

Card IV. — 1. Construct a square on AB.

2. Draw two straight lines, each 2\ inches long, which shall
meet at an angle of 6o°.

3. Construct a triangle with sides of \\ inches, 2\ inches, and
3 inches respectively.

1 66 The TeacJiing of Drawing

Card V. — i. Copy the given triangle, and through the point C
draw a line parallel to the base.

2. Draiv a circle of i inch radius, and divide the circum-
ference i?ito four equal parts.

3. Draw a line 2 \ inches long, and divide it into three equal
parts.

Syllabus, Standard VII.— (^ 1.) Geometrical Drawing,
more advanced than in Standard V.

This sectio?i will include the constniction of a triangle similar
to a given triangle a?id standing on a given base. The drawing
of two ci?'des of given radii touching each other. Construction for
circles passing through three given points, or touching three given
lines. Tangents to two circles. Construction of 7-egular polygons
by any general method, together with their inscribed and circum-
scribed dixie. The use of plain scales.

This subject may be taken instead of section (b.) : — The
drawing of any common objects, and casts of ornament in light and
shade. It is much easier than drawing in light and shade, as it
is very difficult to arrange objects and casts with a suitable light
in ordinary school- rooms. There is nothing in the above
requirements that cannot be easily covered by the pupils in
Standard VII, and it has the advantage of giving a more ad-
vanced knowledge of the very useful and interesting study of
Plane Geometry which has been already begun in Standard V.
The pupils also are now better able to appreciate the value of
exactness and finish in the work, and are more skilful in the

Plane Geometry. Standard VII 167

manipulation of their instruments. To give a complete course
is beyond the scope of this book, as there are plenty of text
books, such as ' Longman's Plane Geometry, Book 14,' which
amply cover all the requirements. A number of examination
questions are given which will indicate the character of the
work. Solutions are given to the more difficult problems, from
which it will be seen that there is no special difficulty to be
overcome. These, of course, should be worked to a much
larger scale. The scales are all drawn half their proper size,
and any necessary notes to the problems are given at the end
of the solutions. Three questions are usually given for the
examination.

Examination Tests

1. Draiv a line to touch the two given circles (fig. 468).

2. Draiv a scale of £" to 1' 0'' to show 7 ft. 5 in. (fig.

3. Copy the given triangle at a scale of \" to \' o" on a base
of 4 ft. 7 in. (fig. 470).

4. Describe a rectangle of which AB is one side and CD a
diagonal (fig. 471).

5. Through the point A draw parallels to BC and CD; also
from A draw perpendiculars to BC, CD (fig. 472).

6. Describe an irregular pentagon of which the sides are 2\
inches, 2 inches, \\ inches, 1 inch, and\ inch. The angle ivhich
the longest side makes with the shortest side is ioo°, and the angle
between the two longest sides is 650 (fig. 473).

7. In a given circle inscribe seven equal touching circles (fig

8. Divide a given quadrant into halves, thirds, and sixths

9. From three given points A, B, C, draw three right lines
equal to one another, to meet in the same point (fig. 476).

1 o. Construct a trefoil of tangential arcs (fig. 477).

1 1. About a given circle construct an octagon (fig. 478).

12. Trisect a given arc (use the dividers).

1 3. Draiv a scale to show 3 ft. 7 in. when t \ inches represent
ifoot(hg, 392).

The Teaching of Drawing

Plane Geometry. Standard VII 169

\jo The Teaching of Drawing

14. Describe a regular pentagon on a base of \\ inches (fig.

15. From two given points, A and B, draiv two circles of

equal radii touching each other (fig. 480).

16. From a given point A draivtwo tangents to a given circle

17. Construct a triangle with sides 2 ft. 9 in., 2 ft. 3 in., and
1 ft. 9 in. respectively. Scale = f to 1' o" (fig. 482).

1 8. Draiv a scale of r^th to show yards and feet, and long
enough to measure five yards (fig. 483).

Notes on the Examination Tests

Fig. 468. — As the two circles are copied, their centres are already
found. Join the centres, and describe a circle with the difference
of their radii. From a draw a tangent ac to the described circle.
Produce be to d, and from a draw a line parallel to bd and rule the
tangent.

Fig. 470. — The scale constructed in fig. 469 will give the base.

Fig. 472. — The readiest method for obtaining the perpendiculars
is to use that shown in fig. 427, as the same arc which was used
for the parallels does also for the perpendiculars.

Fig. 473. — Make a rough sketch first, showing the position of
the angles. Draw ab. Set out the angles of 6$° and ioo° with the
protractor, and complete the sides be and ae.

Fig. 474. — The problem does not state that the circles are to
touch the given circle. If six circles be inscribed, the seventh will
exactly fit in the centre. If the circles had to touch the given
circle, then the circumference would require dividing into fourteen
equal parts.

Fig. 476.— As the lines drawn from A, B, C are to be equal, they
must be radii of a circle ; therefore join AB, BC, and bisect.

Fig. 477. — The arcs are to be tangential — that is, if the circles
were completed they would not cut each other. Construct an
equilateral triangle with each side double the radius of the arc,
and with each angle as a centre describe the arcs. For a quatre-
foil, construct a square, &c.

Fig. 482. — First construct the scale, and make it long enough to
measure 3 feet. As no smaller measurements than 3 inches are
required, it will be sufficient to divide the first unit into four parts.

Plane Geometry. Standard VII 171

Fig. 483. — A scale of ^th to show yards means that the unit to
be taken is ^th of a yard. The scale has to measure 5 yards,
therefore its total length will be B5ff of a yaid = 6 inches. Draw a
line 6 inches long, and divide it as shown into five equal parts,
each of which will represent one yard. Subdivide the first part
into three for the feet.

172 The Teaching of Drazving

CHAPTER IX

SOLID GEOMETRY. STANDARDS VI AND VII

Syllabus, Standard VI. — Plans and elevations of platte
figures and rectangular solids i?i simple positions with sections.
(Girls are not required to take solid geometry in either Stan-
dards VI or VII.)

Apparatus. —Same as for plane geometry for the pupils.
Drawing-boards and T-squares are very useful, but not
essential.

The teacher must also be provided with : —

1. Plane figures, such as the triangle, square, rectangle,
circle, &c, cut out in cardboard • black is preferable to white,
as chalk marks can be made on it.

2. Models of the Solids used, some of which should be cut
to show the sections. These can be bought in sets, or the
teacher, if fond of tools, may construct them in wood. The
easier plan, however, is to make them of cardboard by develop-
ing the surfaces. It is a capital exercise for each pupil to make
his own set of models in this manner, as it encourages manual
dexterity and gives a thorough familiarity with the various
models — a most important acquirement in this subject, as it
is impossible for pupils to represent a solid unless they can
imagine its appearance. The method of constructing some of
the easier solids is given, as no successful work can possibly be
done unless models are well used and handled by the pupils.
For rapid illustration, when a variety of sections, &c, require
showing, a piece of soap is a useful substitute.

3. Model to show the position of the two planes. —Two
small black-boards fastened with a hinge is the most useful.

Solid Geometry. Standard VI 173

Folded paper or cardboard answers very well when the folding
board is not obtainable.

4. Some wire, to show the projecting lines.

The principal solid forms and terms connected with them
are defined here : —

A cube is a solid figure contained by six equal squares.

A prism has its two ends equal, similar, and parallel, and
each of its sides is a parallelogram.

Prisms are named from the shape of their ends ; thus, a square
prism has a square for each end, a pentagonal prism has a pentagon
for each end, &c.

A pyramid has a plane figure for its base, and each of its
sides are triangles, which meet at a point above the base called
the apex.

Pyramids are named from the shape of their bases.

A sphere is generated by the revolution of a semicircle
about its diameter j every part of its surface is equally distant
from the centre.

A cone is generated by the revolution of a right-angled
triangle about its perpendicular.

A cylinder is generated by the revolution of a rectangle
about one of its sides.

The axis is the line passing through the middle of the
solid ; when it is perpendicular to the base or ends of the
solid, the figure is termed a right prism or pyramid.

To make Simple Solids from Cardboard

Figs. 484-490 show the shapes to which the Cardboard
must be cut to form the solids. The figures must first be
accurately drawn to the required size, and carefully cut out
along the outer dark lines. A knife should then be drawn
along the inner light lines, taking care not to cut quite through
the cardboard. Turn up the surfaces on the opposite side to
that which is cut, as this gives a clean unbroken edge. Finish
by gumming thin paper over the joints. Other solids may be
made in a similar manner, and the teacher thus secures a good

1 74 The Teaching of Drawing

set of models at little cost. They may be made solid by filling
with plaster of Paris.

Fig. 484 shows the development of the surfaces of the
cube ; figs. 485 and 486 of the square prism and pyramid ;
figs. 487 and 488 of the equilateral triangular prism and pyra-
mid ; figs. 489 and 490 of the hexagonal prism and pyramid.

Note. — The equilateral triangular pyramid is usually termed a
tetrahedron.

Sections. — There is generally a little difficulty in showing
sections. These may be easily made in cardboard. Suppose,
for example, a section is required through the square pyramid.
After cutting out the surfaces, turn up the sides and mark in
pencil on the edges where the section is required j turn the sides
down, and cut off the parts above the section line. Finish
the model by turning up the edges and gumming as before.

The method in this branch of the course is treated rather
more fully than in some of the previous portions, as it is felt that
solid geometry is the most difficult part for the pupils to under-
stand. All the main difficulties and important principles are
dealt with, and test problems given at the end. The ordinary
books, such as Longman's Book io for Standard VI, and
Book 15 for Standard VII, will afford plenty of examples.

This subject is generally taught in a less satisfactory
manner than any part of the drawing syllabus, partly on
account of the difficulty of the subject in itself, as, although
very little is required, the pupil must imagine the position of
the object and reason out the solution. In actual practical
work it is really the most useful portion of geometrical draw-
ing, as by its aid we represent not only length and breadth, but
thickness also. Carpenters, engineers, and mechanics generally,
make more use of this branch of drawing than any other.
When taught well it is not only very interesting to the pupils,
but it affords excellent mental training. Examples of working
drawings can easily be obtained to show to the pupils. This
arouses their interest, as the practical use of plans and eleva-
tions is at once brought before their minds.

The earlier lessons should be entirely taken up with repre-

Solid Geometry. Standard VI 175

iy6 The Teaching of Drawing

senting plans and elevations of common objects in various
positions. These should be drawn roughly on the blackboard,
the pupils working with a slate and pencil. A line should be
drawn across to separate the plans from the elevations. This
method enables the teacher to deal with a great number of
objects, and thoroughly familiarises the pupils with the idea of
representing objects in a variety of positions. To begin with
definitions and a description of the planes is almost sure to
disgust the pupils, and to effectually kill all interest in the
subject.

Three simple rules should be laid down : —

i. The plan of an object is seen when we look vertically
downwards upon it.

2. The elevation is seen by looking horizontally forwards.

3. Every point in the plan is exactly under the corresponding
point in the elevation.

Let the pupil see the objects, as it is perfectly useless
giving theoretical demonstrations unless the pupils can see and
carry in their minds the appearance of the model when viewed
from different positions. This may be varied by taking some
common object that the pupils are familiar with, and questioning
as to its appearance when seen from various positions, without
showing the model. This cultivates and trains the mental
powers in the very important faculty of remembering what is
seen. Figs. 491-512 show the plans and elevations of a
number of objects suitable for the earlier lessons. These
should be drawn approximately correct, as previously suggested.
The pupils' attention should be directed to the fact that one
drawing shows only two dimensions, as length a?id breadth, and
that the two drawings are necessary to show the height as well.

When the pupils have thoroughly grasped the idea of what
plans and elevations really represent, then the teacher may
show how these drawings may be accurately constructed from
definite statements.

The vertical and horizontal planes may now be explained,
and their relation to one another illustrated. To do this, fold
a piece of paper at right angles, and place it on a board or
table adjoining a wall, so that one half of the paper rests on

Solid Geometry. Standard VI

The Teaching of Drawing

□ D

DD

J

V

EC':

n

\J

•-frx

r\

w

Solid Geometry. Standard VI

the table and the other half against the wall (fig. 5 1 3). Explain
that any perfectly flat surface is called a plane. Illustrate by
reference to the carpenter's plane and its uses. There are
two plane surfaces here, one upright and the other level ; the
upright one is called the vertical plane, and the level one
the horizontal plane. The angle which they make with one
another is a right angle, and the line where the two planes
intersect is called the intersecting line.

Place a small box or any simple object on the horizontal
plane, and trace its shape, abed, on the paper. This will evi-

A

a
t

t

t

b

c

z

dently show the length and breadth of the box, and, as it
shows the space covered by the box on the horizontal or
ground plane and its distance from the vertical plane, it is its
plan. Next, with a long pencil, trace the outline on the
vertical plane, A'B'a'fr. This shows the height, and, as it
represents its appearance when looked at horizontally forwards,
it is its elevation. If the paper be now held up, the plan and
elevation will be seen, as in fig. 514, one exactly under the
other,

N 2

i So

The Teaching of Drazvzng

SOLIDS STANDING ON THEIE FACES

Lesson I. — A problem similar to the following may now be
worked out on the blackboard.

A cube stands on tlie H.P. with two of its faces parallel to the
V.P. Draw the plan and elevation when the back face is
6 inches in front of the V.P.

Note. — The contractions H.P. and V.P. will be used in future
for horizontal and vertical planes respectively.

i. Place the paper showing the planes as in fig. 513. Now
elicit the position in which the cube is to be placed and its
distance from the V.P. Trace its plan. Remove the cube
and show the plan.

2. Draw the intersecting line XY on the board ; let the
pupils show it on the paper, and explain its use. Draw a line
. 6 inches below the intersecting

line, parallel to it, and equal to
an edge of the cube. Con-
struct a square abed on this
line, and show that this square
corresponds with the traced
plan.

3. Replace the paper and
cube, and trace the elevation
on the vertical plane. Remove
the cube, and show the plan
and elevation.

4. Draw projectors from
the plan on the board. Elicit
the height of the cube, and
complete the elevation.

5. Show that the con-
structed drawing corresponds
with the traced one, and ex-
plain that it would be inconvenient to draw with the planes at
right angles to each other, although the pupil must continually
bear this in mind while working.

a

b

y

A

c

Q

b

Solid Geometry. Standard VI

6. Letter the figures, and explain that the same point always
keeps the same letter. If A be a point on a figure, then a will
be its plan and a' its elevation. Find the points at first by
referring to the model.

7. Let the class repeat the drawing to a suitable scale.
Lesson II. — Arrange the planes as before, place a cylinder

standing with its end on the H.P. and proceed as follows.
(Work out each step on the board as it is elicited from the class.)

What position is the cylinder in ? 4 Standing o?i its base.1

In what direction must
I look to see the plan i 5

' Vertically downwards'

What shape do I see if
I look down on the cylin-
der ? ' A circle?

I must now decide
where to draw the circle ;
how shall I find this out ?
* By measuring its distance
from the V.jP.'

Draw a line at right
angles to XYand set off the
distance eb. Measure the
diameter ab of the cylinder,
and describe the circle.

What does the circle
represent ? ' The plan of
the cylinder?

Why ? * Because it is
the space the cylinder covers on the ground?

Could it represent the plan of anything else? 'Sphere
cone, &c?

Where must the elevation be drawn? i Above XV a/id
exactly over the plan?

In what direction must I look to see the elevation ?

What shape do I see then ? ' A rectangle?

Project the width from c and d. Measure the height, and
set it off on the board.

The Teaching of Drawing

Letter points c' and d '.
Where is b' ?

Lesson III. — Place the cube with its sides making angles
with the V.P., and point out that its exact position with
reference to both planes must always be stated. Now write
a problem on the board as follows : — Draiv the plan and

elevation of a cube with one of its

faces i?i the H.P., its nearest corner

i inch from the V.P., and with one

side making an angle of 300 with it.

1. Question out every step with
regard to its position.

Is it on its face or edge ?
Place the model on the plane.
Is it in the required position ?

'No:

Why not ? ' Because its sides do
not make 300 with XY'

Place it in position with the aid
of the 300 set-square.

2. What shape will the plan be ?
1 A square:

Draw a line at 300 with XY,
and on it construct a square.

How many sides are seen in the elevation ? ' Two:
Do they appear to be squares ? Why not ?

3. Project lines from each angle of the plan.
Elicit the height, and complete the elevation.

4. Where will b be in the elevation ? Mark it.

Why not at the bottom ? ' Because the bottom is not visible
in the plan:

Elicit the position of the other angles in the same way.
Frequent reference to the model will be found necessary, as
it is rather difficult for the pupils to find these points at first.

5. Thicken in the visible lines, and explain that the line
from c, not being visible, should be dotted.

Notes. — 1. The teacher will find it easier to take simple positions
of the rectangular solids first, and afterwards proceed to the more

Solid Geometry. Standard VI 183

difficult ones. The square prism, box, &c. should now be treated
in a similar manner.

2. The projectors should be shown with very fine lines, and
care must be taken to see that they are drawn at right angles to
XY. To do this when the ruler and set-square only are used,
place the ruler above XY, and with the set-square draw one pro-
jector, say from a ; now place the ruler below the figure, and with
the set-square rule parallels to the projector already drawn.

SOLIDS STANDING ON AN EDGE

Three positions require illustration :— I. When the edge is
perpendicular to the V.P. II. When the edge is parallel to
the V.P. III. When the edge is neither perpendicular nor
parallel to the V.P.

I. Edge perpendicular to the V.P.

This is perfectly simple. The three figures given below
illustrate what is necessary in this case.

II. Edge parallel to the V.P.

The pupils will soon discover that when the model is in this
position its elevation cannot be determined directly, as the edges

The Teaching of Draivin±

d

of the ends are in an oblique position, and consequently do not
show their true size. The true size of the edges can only be
determined when the end is parallel to the V.P. Hence we
get this general principle, that when the axis of the solid is not
at right angles to the V.P.y a third view showing the true shape
of the end must be obtained first.

The following example illustrates the mode of working : —
Draw the plan and elevation of a cube standing on one edge
with its axis parallel to the KP, and with two of its adjacent
faces making equal angles with the H.P.

I. Elicit its position, and place the cube on the planes as
required. Now show that if we turn it round at right angles
all its dimensions can be ascertained.

2. As two of the
adjacent faces of the
cube make equal angles
with the JT.P, they will
be at angles of 450.
With the 450 set-square
draw B'A' and B'C,
make them the required
length, and complete the
square. Then A' B'CT>'
will represent the true
shape of the end. Ob-
tain the plan ACGE
as in fig. 518.

3. If the plan and
elevation thus found be
each turned at right
angles, the required

plan and elevation will be obtained. In actual practice it is
not necessary to draw the light-lined plan A CGE. It is put
in here, as experience shows, that the pupils can readily grasp
the idea that the required plan eacg is simply the plan EACG
turned at right angles.

Project horizontally from A' and D'. Set off the width
fd', and complete the elevation.

a'

\cv:

a

Bi

V

r

pf

c

cl

f

A

C

a,

Solid Geometry. Standard VI

4. Let the pupils look at the model and notice the shape
of the plan. It will be found .to correspond exactly with the
elevation. This is always the case when either the cube or
square prism have their axes parallel to the V.P. Project
vertically for the plan, and obtain the width as shown.

Note. — The pupils should first draw the elevation and plan as
shown in light line, and then turn them at right angles ; and after-
wards obtain the plan and elevation without using the first plan,
transferring the widths directly from the intersecting line as shown
by the arcs.

Figs. 522 and 523 show similar positions of the square and
triangular prisms.

All four views are shown for the sake of clearness. Re-
member that the required plan is the light-lined plan turned at
right angles, and that after the principle is understood the first
plan may be dispensed with and the widths transferred directly
from the intersecting line.

III. Edge neither perpendicular nor parallel to the V.P.

Draiv the plan and elevation of a cube standing with its edge
in the If. P., and with its axis making a?i angle of 300 with the
V.P.

This is a rather more difficult position than is usually given

The Teaching of Draivin±

to Standard VI. The principle is exactly the same as that used
in the previous problems, so that it is included here for the sake

of completeness. It
is more usual to give
the plan, and require
the elevation to be
drawn from it.

1. Draw the ele-
vation and plan when
the end is parallel to
the FT as before.

2. Place the plan
so that its axis makes
300 with the V.T. ;
ADC then becomes
adc.

3. Project hori-
zontally from A' and
D' for the heights.

4. Use the model well, and project from d and h, giving the
top and bottom edges. Thicken these lines in when obtained,
as it helps to keep the figure clear. Complete the front vertical
face by projecting from a and c to the line from A'. Finish
the back face, showing the unseen edges with a dotted line.

The square prism should be similarly dealt with.

This problem may be worked more quickly by the device
which is constantly used in more advanced solid geometry,
viz., changing the position of the intersecting line and assuming a
fresh vertical plane. The problem may then be solved by using
three figures instead of four. The method is as follows : —

1. Obtain the elevation and plan as before (fig. 525).

2. Instead of moving the plan, move the intersecting line
XY, so that it makes the required angle with the edge of the
plan, X Y. If we now imagine the figure to be turned so
that X Y is horizontal, the plan acge will be in the required
position.

3. Project as before from d and h at right angles to X Y .

Solid Geometry. Standard VI

Set off fi'd' and/'h' equal to B D', and thicken in d'h' and b'f
for the top and bottom edges. Complete the front face, making

a' and c' the same distance above X Y that A' and C are
above XY

4. Complete the back face, and thicken in as before.

PLANE FIGURES

These will present no special difficulty after solids have been
dealt with. Use cardboard figures to illustrate the various posi-
tions. A door opened at various angles shows the varying
width.

Two positions require special attention : — I. When the figure
is vertical and makes an angle with the vertical plane like an
open door. II. When the figure makes an angle with the
horizontal plane like a trap door when opened.

I, A square standing vertically upon one edge makes an angle
0/4$° with the V.P. Draw its plan and elevation (fig. 526).

The same principle must be used as in the preceding pro-
blem, viz., to draw the plan and elevation when the figure is
parallel to the V.P.

1. Draw the elevation a'B'C'd, and the plan aB, when the
square is parallel to the V.P.

The Teaching of Draiving

2. Turn the plan through an angle of 45 ° to position ab.
This will be the required plan.

3. Project from b, and obtain the required elevation a'b'c'd'.

a

B'

d

c'

B

b

The same square has its diagonal vertical. Draw its plan
and elevation {fig. 527).

1. Draw the elevation a'B' CD' and the plan a BC when
the diagonal B D' is vertical and the figure is parallel to the
V.P.

2. Turn the plan aBC into position abc.

3. Project from b and c to the required heights, giving the
elevation a'b'c'd .

II. A square rests with one edge on the H.P. at right angles
to the V.P. Its surface makes an angle of 450 with the H.P.
Draiv its plan and elevation (fig. 528).

1. Draw the plan aBCd, and the elevation a'B', when the
surface is horizontal.

2. Turn the elevation a'B' through the required angle to
position a'b' . This will be the elevation of the door.

3. Project from b' to the plan, giving abed the required
plan.

The same square has one of its diagonals at right angles to
the V.P. Draw its plati and elevation (fig. 529).

Solid Geometry. Standard VI

1. Draw the plan aBCD with the diagonal BD at right
angles to the V.P., and the elevation a'B'C.

c'

a

d

c

r

c

l I

2. Turn the elevation to position a'b'd,

3. Project from the elevation as before for the plan.

SECTIONS

The plan and elevation of an object do not always convey
all the information necessary to construct it. The plan and
the elevation of a house will not show the position and thick-
ness of the floors, nor would the plan and elevation of a fly-
wheel show the shape and thickness of the arms.

To supply information of this character, drawings showing
the shape of the object when supposed to be cut through at
various places are given. These drawings are called sections.

Sectional plans and elevations are all that are usually
required from this Standard. The true shape of the section,
which is really the most important, is not usually asked for.
The difference should be explained to the pupils, and they
should be encouraged to draw the true shape for practice. The
sectional plan is the appearance of the object when viewed
vertically downwards from above ; the sectional elevation is
its appearance when looked at horizontally forwards ; the true

190 The Teaching of Dr diving

shape is seen when the section is viewed at right angles to the
plane of the section.

To illustrate these it is necessary to have either models cut
in various sections or else made in cardboard, as suggested at
the commencement of the chapter. As no fixed section will
illustrate every variety of cut, a piece of soap is very useful for
this purpose.

The line of section should be indicated by figures to avoid
confusion, and the section should be ruled with lines put in
with the 450 set-square about one-eighth of an inch apart.
This will be quite close enough, and permits of the lines being
ruled evenly and carefully. Close section lines are confusing,
and cannot be done neatly by the pupils. If the set-square be
slipped an eighth on the ruler for every line, perfect uniformity
of space between the lines will be secured. The appearance of
a neatly ruled section will amply repay the pupil for the trouble
bestowed on it.

Figs. 530 and 531. — The plans are given of two cubes cut by
a plane passing through 1, 2. Draw the elevation.

The construction lines show what has to be done. The
portions below the section line should not be projected, as they
are supposed to be cut away. The true shape in fig. 530
would be a rectangle having 12 for its base and its height equal
to the height of the cube. It may be shown at right angles to
12 as in 12 ab, or by the side of the elevation as in i'V a" b '.

Figs. 532 and 533.— Elevations of cubes are given. Draw
the sectional plans made by a plane passing through iV.

The portions above the section lines are not projected, as
they are supposed to be removed. In fig. 533 the true shape
is shown as well.

Fig. 535. — The plan of a cube cut by a vertical plane passing
through 1, 2 is given. Draw the sectional elevation.

This is rather more difficult. First obtain the elevation of
the cube as in fig. 524. The section should then be found in
the following manner. Point 1 is on line ae, therefore its eleva-
tion will be on a'e'. Point 2 cuts the edges ab and ad, therefore
its elevation will be the points marked 2', on lines a'b' and ad'.
If each point of the section be traced out and marked in this
way very little difficulty will be found.

Solid Geometry. Standard VI 191

192 The Teaching of Drawing

Fig. 536. — The elevation of a cube is given. Draw the
sectional plan when cut by a plane passing through if$'.

As the plan of the cube when in this position is of the same
shape as its elevation, it can at once be projected. For the
section proceed as follows : — Point i' is on line a'e', therefore
its plan will be on line ae. Point 2' is on line b'f and the line
behind it d'h', therefore its plan will be on bf and dh. Join
the points already found. It is evident that 3' cannot be
projected, because the ends of both plan and elevation are in
the same straight line. The true shape of the end must be
drawn, and 3' projected to it, giving 3'W as the width of the
cut on the end. Set off 3 3 equal to 3" 3'. The corners b
and d are not shown thickened in, as they would be cut away.

Fig. 537. — The plan of a square prism cut by a section plane
1 3 is given. Draw its elevation.

The elevation of the prism will be the same shape as the
plan. Project points 1 and 2 for the section as before. Point
3 must be dealt with in the same manner as in fig. 536.

Fig. 538. — The elevatio?i of a square prism is given. Draw
its plan when cut by a section plane passing through if$'. Care-
fully project the plan of the prism. Trace out each point,
marking it when found by a small dot. Thicken in the figure,
and shade the section.

Fig. 539. — The plan of two steps is given, each of which is as
high as it is wide. Draw the elevation when cut by a plane
passing through 1, 3.

This is rather confusing to young pupils. First project the
two steps and rule in. Remember that in the section, 1 and 2
are on the top step. Point 3 is on the bottom step, and must
only be projected to it.

Solid Geometry. Standard VI

The Teaching of Drawing

Examination Tests. — Two problems are usually given on
each card, which should be arranged on the paper as shown
in fig. 540. The figures given in the tests should be drawn
about three times the given size.

1. AB, BC are the elevations of hvo straight lines parallel
to the V.P. Draw their plans.

2. The given figure is the plan of a cube. Draw its elevation,
and the elevation of the section made by a plane passing through
AB.

Problem 1 presents no special difficulty. Remember that
the true length of a line is shown when the elevation is parallel
to the V.P.,or when the plan is parallel to the H.P. AB and
BC in the question represent the true lengths of the lines.

a'

b

a

c

a

b^

b'

c

c

b

A

a

Solid Geometry. Standard VI

In problem 2 the elevation will be of the same shape as the
plan. The points 1 and 2 cannot be projected to the eleva-
tion, and the true shape of the end must be drawn. If the
points be projected to this end the widths of the section will
be shown by the lines axax and bxbv Make a! a' and b' b'
equal to these widths.

3. AB and CD are the elevations of two squares having two
sides parallel to the V.P. Draw their plans.

4. The given figure is the elevation of a squa?-e prism. Draw
the section when cut by a plane passing through 1,2.

5. Draw the plan of the cube of which the given figure is the
elevation.

6. The given lines represent the elevations of two squares each
of which has a diagonal parallel to the V.P. Draw the plans.

7. The elevation of a square prism 2\ inches long is given.
Draw the plan.

8. The given figure represents the elevation of a cube. Draw
its plan when cut by a plane passing through 1, 2.

9. Three steps are given in elevation. Draw the plan, and
the plan of the section made by the line AB. The steps are 33
feet wide. Scale=}y" to 1' o",

o 2

The Teaching of Drazving

/i

10. The plan of hvo slabs each 1 inch thick is given. Draw
their elevation.

11. The plan of a square slab 1 inch thick surmounted by a
cube is given. Draw the sectional elevation when cut by a vertical
plane AB.

12. The given figure represents the plan of a square prism.
Drazv its elevation.

1 3. Draw the elevation of the square prism, and the elevation
of the section made by the vertical plane 1 2.

14. AB is the plan of a line parallel to the H.P. and 1
inch above it. Draw its elevation.

15. CD is the plan of a line 3 inches long. Drazv its
elevation.

16. The given figure is the plan of a cube. Drazv its sec-
tional elevation when cut by a plane passing through 1,2.

17. The given figure shows the plan of hvo steps in each of
which the zvidth equals the height. Drazv the elevation zvhen cut
by a vertical section through AB.

Solid Geometry. Standard VII

Syllabus. Standard VII. — Plans and elevations of rectan-
gular and circular solids, ivith sections.

The work of Standard VI must be continued in an in-
creased degree of difficulty. Rectangular solids, both singly
and combined, must be drawn in more difficult positions. In
dealing with the circular solids great care must be taken to
keep the construction lines, which are rather numerous, neat
and distinct. In setting off the widths for the elliptical ends,
the greatest exactness must be insisted upon, or it will be found
impossible to secure good curves. When the points for the
curve are obtained, it must be very lightly sketched in first, and
thickened in after an accurate shape has been obtained.

Any number of points may be taken in the curve. It is con-
venient to take either 8 or 12, as the circle can be readily
divided into either of these parts by means of the set-squares.

A few typical positions of the circular solids are shown, with
some examination tests to show the character of the work
required.

Figs. 541-548 show easy positions of the circle, cylinder,
and cone.

k.

rS

\y

J

r

s

j

v.

j

The Teaching of Drawing

Figs. 549-556 show easy sections of the cylinder, cone,
and sphere. In fig. 549 the true shape, as well as the plan of
the section is shown.

Figs. 557 and 558. — Draw the plan and elevation of a
circle : — 1. With its plane vertical and making an angle of 45 °
with the V.P. 2. With its plane perpendicular to the V.P. and
inclined at 6o° to the H.P.

t. The plan will evidently be the line ab inclined at 450
to the V.P. Its elevation will be an ellipse having its longer
diameter c'c' equal to ab and its shorter diameter a'b ' . As,
however, an ellipse cannot be accurately drawn when only four
points of its curve are given, four additional points in the circle
will be taken. The same method as that used in fig. 521 and
the following figures is used here, viz. drawing the true shape of
the figure. In the case of the circle it is neither necessary nor
advisable to put in the whole of the figure on account of the
multiplicity of lines, the semicircle giving all the necessary
measurements.

Solid Geometry, Standard VII

On ab describe a semicircle and divide it into 4 or 6 parts,
as at E, C and F. From E, C and i^draw perpendiculars to
ab giving widths across the
circle at those points. (The
complete circle is inserted
here, the unnecessary part
being in dotted line.)

From a, e, c, /, b project
to the V. P. Set offVV equal
to ab, and draw a'b' midway
between c' and c' . On each
side of a'b' set off the dis-
tance e~E, giving the points
e'e and /'/'. Through the
eight points thus obtained
draw the elliptical elevation.

2. The elevation will be
a line at 6o° to the H.P.
For the plan proceed in
a similar manner to that

shown in the preceding figure. After projecting from the
points, draw ab at any convenient distance from xy, and set
off the widths from the semicircle on each side of it.

Fig. 559 shows the plan and elevation of a cylinder when
its axis is inclined to the V.P. The method is only a repetition
of that explained in fig. 557. Two circles are projected and
joined.

Fig. 560 shows the plan and elevation of the cylinder when
its axis is inclined to the H.P., and also a second elevation
when the cylinder is viewed from the left at right angles to its
former position.

Note.— The second elevation will be readily followed if the
figure be turned so that V P' is horizontal. The first elevation
then becomes the plan for the second, and the lines are merely
repetitions of those in fig. 559.

Fig. 561 shows the plan and elevation of a cone, with its
axis inclined at 300 to the H.P. and parallel to the V.P. Also a
side view similar to that shown in fig. 560.

The Teaching of Drawing

Solid Geometry. Standard VII 201

Fig. 562 shows the plan and elevation of the cone when
lying on its side with its axis parallel to the V.P. Notice that
the cone must first be drawn in an upright position, and then
turned so as to bring the side into the H.P. for the required
elevation.

Fig. 563 shows the plan of the sphere cut by the section
plane iV.

Fig. 564 shows the elevation of the sphere when cut by a
vertical plane 1 2.

Fig. 565 shows the sectional plan and true shape of a
cylinder when cut by the plane iV. All oblique sections of
the cylinder are ellipses or portions of ellipses. After drawing
the plan of the cylinder, draw the centre line \p. Point 1 will
be the extremity of the longer diameter of the ellipse. Describe
a semicircle on the elevation, showing half the shape of the
end, and draw 2V. On each side of p set off the distance 2V,
giving 2 2, the width of the section on the end of the cylinder.
Through the centre a of the semicircle draw ab, and produce
it to meet the section line at 3'. Project from 3' to the plan,
giving the points 3, 3, where the section will be widest. The

The Teaching of Drawing

curve might now be drawn, but its accuracy will be better
secured by fixing at least two more points. Mark point 4',
and project horizontally and vertically. Set off the distance
cd on each side of the centre line, giving the points 4, 4.
Through the points obtained draw the curve. The true shape
is easily followed from the construction lines. Project at right
angles to the section, and draw the centre line. The widths
will be exactly the same as in the plan.

* Fig. 566 shows the elevation of a cylinder cut by a vertical
plane 12. After obtaining the elevation of the cylinder, pro-
ject from 1 to the middle line of the elevation, giving 1', and
from 2 to the end, giving 2V. Produce ab to meet the section
line at 3. From 3 project to the elevation, setting off the
distance ab on each side of the centre line for the points 3' 3'.
Through the points thus obtained draw the curve.

Solid Geometry. Standard VII

Fig. 567 shows the plan of a cone when cut by the section
plane i'a'. When the cone is cut by a plane which passes
through both sides, the section is an ellipse. Project from i'
and 2', giving points 1 and 2, the length of one diameter of
the ellipse. Take point 3' on the section line, and suppose a
horizontal section to pass through this point. The plan of this
section would be a circle, and if 3' be projected to this plan
two more points 3, 3 in the section will be obtained. Take
other sections, and proceed in a similar manner. Draw the
curve through the points obtained.

Fig. 568 shows the elevation of a cone cut by a vertical
section through 1, 2. After obtaining the elevation of the cone,
project points 1 and 2, giving iV the width of the section.
Next obtain the height. From the centre 0 draw a line at
right angles to the section, and with 0 as centre describe a circle

The Teaching of Drawing

touching the section. From a project to a', and from a' draw
a line representing the elevation of the circle described. A
projector from 3 will give 3', the top of the section. To obtain
other points in the curve, mark 4, describe a circle passing
through it, project the elevation of this circle at b\ and from
the points 4, 4 project for 4V. Other points may be obtained
in the same way. This section is called the hyperbola.

Fig". 569 shows the plan of a section made by the plane
iV parallel to the side of the cone, also the true shape of that
section. Project the points 1' and 2', giving 11, the width, and
2, highest point of the curve. To find other points in the curve,
take any number of points, as 3' and 4', and draw horizontal
section lines through these points. Obtain the plans of the

circles of which these lines are the elevations. Project from
points 3' and 4' to the plans of these circles, giving the points
3, 3 and 4, 4, and draw the curve. For the true shape project
at right angles from each point of the section, draw a centre line,
and set off,i//i" equal to 1 1, 3" 3" equal to 3 3, &c. The curve
drawn through these points will be that known as the parabola.

Solid Geometry. Standard VII

Examination Tests. — Solutions or references are given
where needed. All the figures must be copied to a much
larger scale.

1. The given figure repre-
sents the plan of a right cylin-
der, with an axis of \\".
Copy the plan, and draw the
sectional elevation.

2. The elevation of a cube
surmounted by a sphere is given.
Copy the elevation, and draw
the plan, showing the section
made by AB. {Fig. 563.)

4. The given figure shozvs
the elevation of a cone. Draw
the plan and plan of section
made by AB. {Fig. 567.)

3. AB and BC are the ele-
vations of two circles. Dratv
the plans.

5. The given figure is the
plan of a cone with a section
passing through its centre.
Draw the elevation. {Fig. 570.)

6. The given figure is the
elevation of a cylinder. Draiv
its plan, and the plan of a
section made by A B. {Fig. 571.)

The TeacJiing of Drawing

7. The elevation of a cone
is given. Draw its plan. {Fig.

8. The given figure is the
elevation of a cube with a hemi-
sphere placed upon it. Draw
the plan, and show the section
on AB. {Fig. 572.)

S£

9. The figure is the plan of
a circular slab 2 inches thick,
with a cube of 2-inch edges placed
centrally on it. Draw the ele-
vation, and show the section
made by AB. {Fig. 573.)

10. The figure is the plan
of a cube pierced by a cylin-
drical tube. Draw the eleva-
tion, and show the section on

Solid Geometry. Standard VII

2c8 The Teaching of Drawing

CHAPTER X

MODEL DRAWING. STANDARDS V AND VI

Syllabus. Standard V. — Drazvingfrom simple rectangular
and circular models, and easy com??ion objects.

Model drawing requires both greater skill in teaching and in-
creased dexterity in drawing from the teacher. In freehand
drawing all draw the same view, hence class teaching has been
easy ; but in model drawing class teaching can only be used to
demonstrate the principles, and to show how the model would
appear under certain conditions. The fact that every pupil
sees a different view of the object necessarily prevents them
from clearly comprehending the illustrations drawn upon the
board, simply because they do not appear so to them. So that
although the board may be used to a great extent, it is abso-
lutely necessary, if really good work is to be secured, that there
should be a large amount of individual supervision. The
teacher will find it necessary to go to each pupil, take the same
position, and then show how to obtain a correct representation
of the object. Attention to good methods and plenty of
practice are the two great secrets of success. As the pupils
understand the methods adopted, only the slower ones need so
much individual supervision, and if plenty of practice be given,
this branch of drawing becomes very attractive, especially when
common objects are taken. When the pupils can successfully
represent some object with which they are familiar, their interest
is aroused and stimulated, as they see some tangible result of
this drawing of cubes, cylinders, &c, which must certainly ap-
pear somewhat unattractive and monotonous to them if not
sufficiently varied.

The pupils having already acquired the knowledge of how

Model Drawing. Standard V

to draw straight lines, how to ascertain the various proportions
of a copy, and how to apply this knowledge so as to secure an
accurate drawing, it is now only necessary to show how this
knowledge may be applied to the drawing of objects.

Introductory Lessons. —These should be taken on slates,
as their object is to cultivate the observing and reasoning
faculties, and to bring clearly home to the minds of the pupils
important principles upon which success in model drawing
largely depends. The lessons should be short, with plenty of
illustrations, and the sketches should be rapidly made.

First Lesson.— The door will form a suitable example.

1. Let the pupils
commence by drawing
a vertical line ab to re-
present one side (fig.
575). Now ascertain the
width as compared with
the height, and complete
the rectangle.

2. Open the door at
an angle, and let the
pupils now measure the
width as compared with
the height. They will
discover that the width
has decreased and that

the upright lines must now be drawn closer together (fig. 576).
This shows the variation in the width of a plane surface when
seen at various angles.

Second Lesson. — Take a piece of cardboard about 2 feet
square. Place it so that all can see as nearly as possible the
same view.

1. Let the pupils rapidly sketch it on their slates, noticing
that the sides will be vertical and the top and bottom horizontal

2. Turn the cardboard at an angle, and let the pupils draw
it under fig. 577, step by step from the teacher's direction, and
working with him.

p

2IO

The Teaching of Drawing

Draw the nearest vertical edge ab.
Is the width the same as in the first drawing ?
Measure the width, and compare with the height,
other vertical side cd.

Draw the

Is the top edge now horizontal ? They will not all be able
to decide this.

Let all hold their pencils in a horizontal position level with
point a.

Is the back corner above the pencil? ' Yes.'
Then the line must run up. Draw ae to represent the level
of the pencil. Notice the angle made by the edge of the card-
board with the horizontal pencil, and draw it as nearly as pos-
sible. This will give the top edge ac.

3. Measure the back vertical edge of the cardboard, and
compare it with the front. They will discover that it measures a
shorter distance. Make cd less than ab, and draw the bottom

edge bd*

4. Change the position of
the card again, and note that
the width appears still less and
that ac makes a greater angle
with ae than before.

Another illustration that is
very convincing to children is
to arrange a board in a hori-
zontal position and on it to place three objects of equal height,
one at a, another at b, and a third at c. Let the pupils measure

Model Drawing. Standard V 211

c with the pencil, and apply this distance to b. It will be found
that it only covers part of b, and on applying the distance to
a a larger portion still is not covered by it.

The pupils will nowT have been familiarised with two most
important principles in model drawing : —

1. The varying ividth of a plane surface when viewed at dif-
ferent angles.

2. The stnaller space occupied by an object when it is removed
farther back.

Now hold the card above the eye, and direct attention to
the fact that the top and bottom lines appear to run down.
Place it level with the eye, and show that the back corner is
level with the front. This will enable the pupils to grasp the
idea of lines vanishing to the level of the eye. The fact that
the top line of the door runs down will be demonstrated directly
the pencil is held horizontally level with the front top corner,
when the back corner will be found to be below it j and in the
same manner if the pencil be held level with the front bottom
corner, the back corner will be seen above the pencil, and the
bottom line of the door will consequently run up.

Several short lessons of this character, well illustrated and
rapidly drawn, will do more to fix these important truths than
the drawing of many models before these ideas are understood.

After the teacher has drawn the various views on the board,
the pupils should always be allowed to make their own repre-
sentation of the object. Care should be taken to keep as
nearly as possible the same view before all the class. It is
very necessary that the teacher should be able to sketch these
views correctly on the board, as otherwise much mischief will
be done. A little previous practice and forethought will enable
almost any teacher who can draw a straight line to illustrate all
that is necessary.

The various models will now be treated separately in typical
positions, such as lend themselves to demonstration on the
blackboard. After the pupils have gone through these care-
fully, they will experience but little difficulty in dealing' with
other views. It is very desirable that the ordinary models
should be followed up by a judicious selection of common

p 2

212 The Teaching of Drawing

objects. Instead of going through all the models first, it will
be found far more interesting to combine the drawing of the
models with common objects. When the cube and square
prism have been dealt with, a box or any similar simple object
should be drawn. Children do not associate the drawing of
the cube with anything useful, but when able to draw a box or
a book they feel that considerable strides have been made.

Arrangement of the models. — In the earlier lessons it is
very desirable that, as far as possible, only one view should be
drawn, as the teacher's difficulties will be very much increased

if more than one view has to
be dealt with in the same
lesson. To secure this, if the
class be large several models
should be used. This is only
necessary when dealing with
the model for the first time, as
after the pupils have drawn
two or three views they will be
able to apply the principles
to other views without much
difficulty. Fig. 580 shows the
arrangement for a lesson, a, <£, c show the position of the
models, which should be large and placed as far from the
class as possible, as by that means it is more easy to secure a
similar view for all the class.

THE CUBE

First Lesson. — 1. The easiest position in which to draw the
cube is evidently wThen one vertical face only is visible. Place
the models as shown in fig. 580. If only one cube be obtain-
able, square boxes, or cubes made of mill board, will make very
good substitutes.

Question rapidly as follows : —

What is the object called ? ' A cube.''

How many faces has it ? ' Six.'

How many edges ?

czz

rzi3

CZZl

CZZ)

CZZ)

CZZ

CZZ)

CZZ)

CZZl

CZZ

CZZ)

CZZ)

CZZ)

CZZl

CZZ

CZZ

CZZ)

CZZ)

CZZl

CZZ

CZZ)

CZZ)

CZZ)

CZZl

CZZ

a

b

c

Model Drawing. Standard V 213

What is the shape of each face ?
What is a square ?

How many faces can you see ? ■ Two.'
What positions are they in ? ' One vertical and one hori-
zontal?

Which face can you see most of? ' The vertical face.'

What shape is it ? ' A square?

Draw a square abed of about 4-inch sides.

2. Beginners generally make the error of drawing the top
face too wide. To prevent

this careful measurement is 5Sl

necessary. To assist the 1 _, I

pupils, place a ruler on the
edge cd of the model, and
gradually raise it until it is in
a line with the back edge ef.
Now hold the ruler still, and
let the pupils take the vertical
distance from cd to the edge
of the ruler and compare it
with the height of the model.

Before doing this, let the pupils estimate the distance with
their eye. Most of them will be astonished at the difference.
Now mark the distance and draw the line ef.

3. The next point is to decide upon the length of ef Let
the teacher place a pencil vertically upon the corner c of the
model.

Which side of the pencil is the back corner ? ' Right.'
Mark it on the line ef Now place the pencil on d.
Which side of the pencil is the other back corner ? ' Left.'
Mark it, and join e and /with c and d.
Ought efto be less than cd? ' Yes.'
Why ? ' Because it is further away.'

4. Now show a large drawing previously made in which the
back lines are equal to the front, fig. 582. On being questioned
the pupils will probably say that 1 is longer than 2. Measure
the lines, and show that they are equal. Now explain that we
always draw objects not as they really are, but as we see them.

TJic Teaching of Drawing

All this can be shown from the board, but it will also be
necessary to visit each pupil to see that the drawing is generally
correct.

Second Lesson. — Place the cubes so that three faces are
visible (fig. 583).

1. Begin with ab, the nearest vertical line, and fix its
length.

2. Measure the width of the widest face, and compare with
ab. Mark this width, and draw cd.

3. Compare the narrower vertical face with the wider one
and draw ef Before anything else is attempted the horizontal
distance between ef and cd should be compared with ab. It
will be found to be greater.

4. Draw a very light horizontal line through a. Hold the
pencil in a horizontal position level with point a on the model,
and notice carefully the angle made with the pencil by the
wider edge ac, and frcm a draw ac making a similar angle.
Direct attention to the fact that the wider the side the less this
line will slope.

Find the inclination of ae in the same manner.
These lines ac and ae should be carefully verified before
proceeding, as the rest of the model depends upon them.

5. Look at ac, and draw eg slightly converging towards it.
From c draw eg converging slightly towards ae.

Model Drawing. Standard V

6. Recall the exercise in measuring in fig. 579.

Is cd shorter than ab ? Why ?

Is it much shorter ? ; No?

Why not ? ' Because it is not much farther off.'

Then make cd slightly less than ab, and draw bd.

Elicit that ef\$ shorter than cd because it is farther back,
and draw bf

Third Lesson. — The cube may now be drawn when its
vertical faces appear equal as in fig. 584. This will present no
special difficulty.

The lines should be drawn according to the order in which
they are numbered.

Common errors. — Fig. 585 shows a very common error,
arising from the fact that the teacher has drawn such views in
perspective. In this the pupil is supposed to be drawing the
cube when looking at something else, an impossible task. The
error may be easily demonstrated by holding the edge of the
drawing-book horizontally level with a} when the sides of the
cube will be seen making an angle with the edge of the book.
The pupils are liable to make the error, because the face of the
cube is parallel to the front of the desks. The simplest way to
avoid the error is to lay down the rule that ab can only be hori-
zontal when the pupil is quite in front and sees only that vertical
face. From this deduce the rule that ivhen nearly in front ab
will be nearly horizontal, &c,

The Teaching of Drawing

Fig. 586 shows another common mistake. Here the lines
vanish too much, producing a distorted representation of the

object.

The height of the eye and the
position of vanishing lines may now
be explained. Draw a horizontal line
ab on the board to represent the
edge of the horizontal plane upon
which the model stands (fig. 587).
Let the pupils point out on the wall
the level of their eye Draw a line
cd to represent this. Draw a cube
as shown, and explain that the edges,

if carried far enough, would appear to meet at the level of the

eye as shown.

C ct

a

The square prism. — The only fresh point is that one of the
sides is longer than the other. The prism may be easily con-
verted into a box, as in fig. 588.

zf

\a

The square frame is very useful for showing how to
obtain the width of the sides. The sides a and b will be seen
wider than c and d. To decide what this width should be,

Model Drawing.

Standard V

point out that if from c to d equals \ of the distance from a to
b, then the thickness of the wood at c and d should be £ of
the thickness at a and b.

A box, such as that shown in fig. 590, is a suitable model
to take next. After drawing
the box, and marking the 59°

position of the lid, obtain the
keyhole by drawing the dia-
gonals for the centre of the
side. Through this centre
draw a vertical line, and on
it place the keyhole. Notice
that the half ab will be slightly
larger than be, because it is
nearer to the spectator.

A slate may now be attempted. This is a rather difficult
object, and at this stage should only be drawn in an easy
position. A number of slates can easily be arranged so that all
the class may see a similar view.

1. Draw ab. Obtain the side cd and the points c and d in
the same manner as shown in fig. 581.

2. Draw the width of the frame as in fig. 589.

3. For the thickness of the frame draw vertical lines from
a and b, and on them mark off the thickness. A common error
is to make these lines slope outwards.

4. It may be left at this stage if thought fit. If where the
slate fits the frame be indicated, then direct attention to the
fact that this distance is £ of the thickness of the frame.

The book. — Let the pupils draw a rectangular prism similar
to fig. 592 from a copy on the board. Turn it into a book as

2 1 3 The Teaching of Drawing

shown in fig. 593. They will thus see the principles upon
which the book is drawn.

Now put up a sufficient number of books so that all have a
similar view, and draw as shown in fig. 594. Notice that the
edge of the leaves falls within the cover. If the drawing be a

large one the thickness of the cover may be indicated. On a
small drawing the thickness is better left out for the present.

Other rectangular objects, such as bricks, &c, may now be
taken. Probably a sufficient number are given here for the
present. It is not advisable at this stage to draw difficult
positions ; a few familiar objects in easy positions interest the
pupils more and secure better results. If difficult positions are
given at this early stage the pupils cannot make creditable
drawings and are more likely to be disgusted at their attempts
to represent the object.

THE CYLINDER

This is a very important model, as it enters into the formation
of such a large number of objects.

Axis vertical. First Lesson

1. Draw ab and fix its length. Compare the width of the
cylinder with its height, and draw cd. Join a with c, and b with

Model Draiving. Standard V

d. Examine the drawings at this stage to see that the pro-
portions are correct.

2. Take a circle cut out of cardboard, and show the varia-
tions in its shape as the circle is changed
from a horizontal to a vertical position.

3. Draw ellipses on the board, show-
ing the most common errors.

Question on these, elicit the defects,
and correct. Fig. 596 is too flat. Fig.
597 is made up of two curves meeting
and forming angles at a and b. This
error is best remedied by drawing the
curved portions at a and b first. Fig. 598
is not symmetrical. This may be easily tested by holding the
drawing so that ab is vertical. ' The defect is then easily
detected.

4. Find the centre of ac and bd, and draw the shorter
diameters. Compare the width f/with ac. Draw the rounded
portions at a and c as shown in fig. 599. Complete the ellipse.
Test it as explained in fig. 598.

t

at

y

dL--

d b

A

5. Take the circular card again and hold it in a horizontal
position, level with the eye. Its shape will be a line (fig. 601 A),

The Teaching of Drawing

Place it lower down, level with the top of the cylinder.
Its shape will now be represented by B. Now place it level
with the bottom of cylinder, and compare its width with the
width when at B. Its shape will now be represented by the
wider ellipse C. Hence the bottom of the cylinder must be
drawn slightly wider than the top. Why ? ' Because it is more
below the level of the eye.1 It is advisable to draw the rounded
ends at b and d (fig. 600). If not, the tendency is to make a
corner at these points, as in fig. 597.

A number of easy common objects should follow this lesson.
Let the teacher draw several cylinders on the board, and illus-
trate how they may be converted into representations of objects,
as in figs. 602-605.

These may be drawn from the blackboard copies by the
pupils, as they form good exercises in freehand as well as model
drawing. This is generally a fascinating lesson for children,
and may be used as an exercise in memory drawing. They also
make good examples for dictated drawing, given as follows : —
Draw a cylinder half as ivide as it is high. Turn this drawing
into a jug, showing a handle and a spout. An exercise of this
kind helps to develop the inventive faculties, as a great variety
of curves will be produced. It is, however, of no use doing
this until after exercises similar to figs. 602 to 605 have been
shown.

Axis horizontal. — This is a much more difficult position,
and much care must be bestowed upon it. It is easier to adopt
two fixed methods. I. When the end of the cylinder is facing or

Model Draiving. Standard V

nearly facing the pupil. II. When the axis is inclined to the
picture plane.

1. First Lesson. — i. Arrange several cylinders before the
class so that all see a similar view — viz., end nearly facing the
pupil. This is easier to draw than when the end is exactly
opposite. Rolls of paper or jars will make suitable substitutes
if a number of cylinders are not available.

2. Draw ab and cd (fig. 606). Let the pupils test whether
cd be less than ab, and draw the front face. This will be nearly
a circle.

3. Measure the distance from the front edge to the back
edge. Compare wTith cd, set this distance off from ab, and draw ef.

Why is ef shorter than ab ? ' Because it is farther back.''
Through the centre of <?/"draw gh, and make it a little less
than cd. Draw the back curve. These two curves should be
similar in shape, but the back one a little smaller than the front
one.

4. Join the two curves.

Note.— When the drawing is lined in, all the portions shown
in dotted line should be omitted.

Fig. 607 shows the cylinder when the end is exactly opposite
to the pupil. Draw two circles and join them. This is not so
easy to demonstrate as fig. 606, as the construction lines of the
back circle clash with those of the front one. The back circle
is, of course, smaller than that in front.

II. Axis inclined to the picture plane.— This position of

222 The Teaching of Drawing

the cylinder is the real difficulty, not on account of the actual
drawing, but from the fact that it is difficult for the pupil to
correctly estimate the angle of inclination. When in this posi-
tion it is easier to draw the inclination of the axis first, instead
of the longer diameter of the elliptical end.

i. Arrange the model so that a somewhat similar view is
seen by all. It is not now so essential that all should see exactly
the same view. Explain the term ' axis,' and mark point a for
one end. Through a draw a horizontal line. To get the
inclination of the axis, hold the pencil in a horizontal position
level with point e, and notice the angle made between it and the
top edge ceof the cylinder. Through a draw a/* at this inclina-
tion.

Note. — This is quite accurate enough for all practical purposes ;
strictly speaking, the angle of inclination at a is slightly larger than
that at c. It is, however, impossible for the pupil to measure the
inclination at the axis, as it is not visible. This angle should be
tested repeatedly until the pupil has obtained it fairly accurately.
It is a good plan to call several pupils out to the board, and let
them draw the inclination which they see. This prevents the lazy
ones shirking this most essential step, as if the inclination be in-
correct the rest of the model will be wrong.

2. Through a draw be at right angles to the axis, and fix its
length. If the axis and this line be obtained correctly, the rest
of the model presents no special difficulty.

3. Compare the length of the cylinder with be, and set it off

Model Drawing.

Standard V

from a. Through / draw ed parallel to be and slightly shorter.
Draw ee and bd (fig. 608).

Notes. — 1. In estimating the length of the cylinder, measure
from h to / (fig. 609). This is easier than from c to e. Common
errors are to make the length too great and the back end too small.

2. The figure, when in the stage represented by fig. 608, should
be carefully examined to see that the proportions are accurate.

4. Compare the width gh with be, and draw the ellipse.
Complete the back in the same manner Remember that the
back ellipse is slightly rounder than the front j hi should be a
little longer than ee.

THE CONE

I. Axis vertical. —Commence with the ellipse. Produce
ab for the height, and draw the sides (fig. 610J.

II. Lying on its side. — This is a very awkward position,
as it requires considerable judgment to estimate the slope of
the axis.

1. Mark a point a for the centre of the base, and through
it draw a horizontal line. Hold the pencil so as to be in line
with the axis, and with the other hand hold a pencil or ruler
horizontally level with a. The angle between the two pencils

will be the inclination of the axis. The line ab represents the
position of the right-hand pencil, the dotted line that of the
other. Test this until sure of the inclination, and draw ab.

2. Through a draw ed at right angles to ab. Determine
the length of ed.

The Teaching of Draiving

3. Compare the width with cd, and draw the ellipse.

4. Compare ab with cd, and draw the sides. Notice that
these lines do not touch the ellipse at d and c.

Notes. — 1. The drawing may be additionally verified by testing
the slope of cb.

2. As the ellipse widens, the distance ab will decrease.

The principles of construction involved in the preceding
figures are applicable to all rectangular and circular models.
An increased number of common objects can now be drawn.
A few typical examples bringing in fresh points are now given.

Fig. 612 shows a box with the lid partly open. The fresh
point here is the obtaining of the point a. Hold the pencil
vertically and notice the position of point b, which is directly
under a. Draw an upright line ab. Compare the height ab
with the height of the box, and draw ac. To obtain d, draw a
line be vanishing with the length of the box, and from e draw a
vertical line ed a little less than ab. Join a with d.

Fig. 613 shows the lid open at a different angle. To obtain
a, find its horizontal distance from, and its vertical distance
above, b.

Fig. 614. — To obtain the open cover of the book, produce
ab, make ac slightly less, and draw cd.

Fig. 615. — Draw abed. Find the centre by drawing the
diagonals, and draw ef vanishing with ab and cd. Obtain the
line above ef, showing the opening of the leaves. Notice that
the leaves open like the box lid, in a circle of which eb is the

Model Drawing. Standard V

radius. Of course this circle will be represented as an ellipse
in the drawing. Draw the top leaves first, and observe that ail

the openings radiate from the back, and that the long edges of
the leaves vanish in the same direction,

Fig\ 616 shows the cylinder standing on a board. {Always
draw the board last.) Having
drawn the cylinder after esti-
mating the space necessary
for the board, notice the
distance between at? and the
edge of the cylinder. Fix
point a with reference to the
side of the cylinder, and
after noting the inclination
draw ab. Find how far b is
from the side of the cylinder.
Draw ac. Very carefully
notice where the back line
of the board cuts the cylinder,
through it to meet ac.

Note. — A board presents considerable difficulty to young pupils
at first. The tendency to make it too wide seems inevitable. This
can only be remedied by careful measurement.

Mark this point, and draw

The Teaching of Drawing

Draw vertical lines from a, b and c. and set off the thick-
ness. If these lines are drawn longer than the required thickness

as shown, the common error of
making these short lines sloping
will be avoided.

Fig. 617 shows the cone with
a slate. Proceed as in the pre-
vious figure. The width of the
slate frame may be obtained by
drawing diagonal lines as shown,
or as in fig. 591.

Fig. 618 shows an ordinary
jam pot. Draw the rectangle
» ! abed. Next obtain the bottom

ellipse. Find the position of
the shoulder ef, and draw the ellipse. Divide the space from
e to c for the rim and neck. Find the size of the mouth and
draw the ellipse. Two similar ellipses on Im and gh will give
the neck. In showing the thickness be careful to represent
the greatest width at the parts nearest to c and d.

Fig. 619 shows the same object when lying on its side.
After obtaining the inclination of the axis as in fig. 608, draw

Model Drazving. Standard V

cbde. Obtain the mouth and foot of the jar. The ellipse for
the shoulder will fall on the ellipse forming the neck, as shown.
The neck will be represented by the inner ellipse.

Figs. 620-622 show a common jug in three positions.
Handles are always difficult to represent well, so that three
views are given here. Notice in all that a line through the
centre gives the position of both handle and spout. In fig. 620

the handle is not so difficult

the thickness is represented by

two parallel lines, and the width by a line which gradually runs

into the thickness. Lines drawn as shown are of considerable

assistance in obtaining the curve. In fig. 621 the handle is a

band slightly broadening out where it is

attached, to the jug. It is in fig. 622 that

the real difficulty presents itself. Fix the

position of the spout and draw a line from

this point through the centre, produce this

line to b, and draw a vertical line be. The

handle will fall within these lines. To obtain

its position on the neck, draw a vertical line

ad from a. From d draw the curve de, giving

the position of the handle on the body. Now,

using these lines as a guide, draw the curve

The right-hand curve is drawn in a similar

manner to that on the left, as in the handle shown in fig. 623.

Join the two curves at the top and complete. All handles of

this kind should be obtained in this way.

Q2

The TeacJiing of Drawing

The drawing of a bucket is shown in fig. 354. Notice the
method of obtaining the handle. A bell is shown in fig. 327.
The glue pot shown in fig. 356 forms an excellent model, giving
double practice in the drawing of handles.

Fig. 624 shows an ordinary gallon bottle. After obtaining
its proportions, * draw the rectangle abed, and the ellipses for
the bottom, shoulder, and commencement of the neck. Now

set off the lines efand gh for the neck and cork. An enlarged
drawing of this part is shown with the necessary construction
lines. The handle is obtained in a similar manner to that of
the jug.

Fig. 625 shows an ordinary roller. The fresh point to

notice is the method of drawing the handle.

After obtaining

Model Drawing. Standard V

the roller, draw ab vanishing with the length, and join a and b
with the ends of the axis. Draw the diagonal dg, and from
the centre draw oh vanish-
ing with ac. Fix the length c 626
and draw Im vanishing
with de.

Fig. 626 shows how to
obtain the handle of a
common tin saucepan when
it is turned either towards
or from the pupil. Mark
the position of the handle,
and draw a line ab through
the centre of the top ellipse.
Draw bd about the height
that the handle stands
above the mouth. Draw

dc vanishing with ab, and produce it towards e. The top of
the handle must lie in this line. Mark its position e, and draw
the centre line of the handle. The rest of the drawing is
easily completed.

Note. — This is a very important principle, and is applicable to
many objects. The handle of a hot-water can or of a kettle would
need the same lines of construction.

r -»J T -JT; '

THE HEXAGONAL PRISM

This important model is not often set for Standard V, as it
is not strictly speaking a purely rectangular model. It is,
however, very commonly set for the other standards. If the
proper principles of construction are not understood it is by no
means easy. The following methods, if followed out carefully,
will secure an accurate drawing without much difficulty.

Axis Vertical. First Lesson. — 1. Arrange the prism so that
the pupils are opposite one of the rectangular faces. Draw ab,
and decide upon its length. Compare the width of the front
face with the height and draw cd. Complete the rectangle
abed (fig. 627).

The Teaching of Draiving

2. Estimate the distance that ef appears to be from ac, as
in fig. 581. Make e/a. little less than ac and draw ae and cf.

3. Draw the diagonals ec and af. Through 0 draw a line
parallel to ac. Make gh=go and /m=/o. (These four
distances are always equal in the hexagon.)

4. Complete the top by drawing ah, he, fm, and mc (fig.

5. Draw hn and mp each a little less than ab, and complete
the figure.

Second Lesson. — 1. Arrange the prism so that its rectangular
faces appear of unequal widths. Draw the vertical edge ab,
which is nearest to the pupil. Compare the width of the widest
face with ab, and draw cd. (This measurement should be care-
fully tested before proceeding further, as the proportions of the
other faces depend largely upon this.) Compare the next widest
face with ac, and draw ef

2. Set off the width of the narrower face on the wider so
that 1 = 2. On the right of cd set off a little less than the
distance marked 3, and draw gh. Then 2 + 3 will be a little
greater than 1 + 4.

3. Test the inclination and draw ac. (This will be almost
horizontal^ Draw ae sloping a little more than ac. From e
draw eg vanishing very slightly with ac. Join c and g.

Model Drawing. Standard V

4. Find the centre of eg, and draw al. From e draw em
vanishing with al.

5. From c draw a line through the centre to meet em.
Draw gl vanishing with cm. Join m and /.

6. Complete the prism by drawing bd, bf and dk, vanishing
with the corresponding lines on the top.

Notes. — 1. The pupil must bear in mind that the lines of the
top vanish very slightly, as they are not very far from each other.

2. Particular attention should be given to the inclination of ac
and ae, as if these lines slope too much the top of the prism will
appear distorted.

3. The pupils' attention should be directed to the fact that there
are three sets of parallel lines in the top of the figure.

4. In fig. 628 the two narrower sides could be made each a
little less than half the middle face, and the hexagon finished in a
similar manner to fig. 629.

Axis Horizontal. I. End parallel with picture plane

t. Draw a vertical line ab to represent the height of the
end. As the pupil is directly in front, draw a horizontal line
ac for the top side of the
end. Compare ac with ab,
and draw cd and bd. The
width ac should be very care-
fully verified in all cases before
proceeding any farther, as if
that be incorrect the whole of
the end will be wrong.

2. Bisect ab and cd, and
draw ef. This is preferable
to drawing the diagonals of
the rectangle abed, as the
pupil has two points through
which to draw ef instead of
one.

3. Bisect ef in 0. Set off eg equal to eo zndf/i equal to fo.
Complete the end by drawing ag, gb, dh and he.

Note. — These construction lines should be drawn with chalk on
the end of the model.

The Teaching of Draivmg

4. Measure the distance to the back line Im, find the
position of the back corners in exactly the same manner as
shown in fig. 581, and draw a/ and cm.

Note— Im will, of course, be less than ac.

5. Draw one vertical line In less than ae. Complete the
top half of the back hexagon, and draw gp and hq.

Nate.— The advantage of drawing^ is, that the corners^ and
q are then accurately shown. There is a tendency to let the lines
gp and pi run into each other instead of showing an angle.

II. End nearly parallel with the picture plane.

1. This is similar to the last figure. Draw ab. Find the
width between the vertical lines, and draw cd. Test the

inclination of ac. (Nearly
63: level, because the end is

nearly opposite.) Draw bd,
making cd very slightly less
than ab.

2. Bisect ab and cd,
and draw ef. Be careful
to see that all three lines
vanish in the same direc-
tion. Find the centre 0
as before, or by drawing
the diagonal ad, and set
off the distances as in the
previous figure. Draw ae,
eb, df, and fc.

3. Test the inclination of ag, bearing in mind that if ac is
nearly horizontal then ag will have a considerable slope.
The easiest way to find the position of g is to hold a pencil
vertically in line wTith g, and notice its distance right or left
of e.

4. From g draw a vertical line gh, and make it shorter than
ab. Draw bh.

5. From e draw em vanishing with ag, and draw hm and
gm. The point ;;/ may also be obtained by drawing the line

Model Drazving. Standard V

nm from the centre of gh and making it slightly less than the
corresponding distance on the front end.

6. Draw gl vanishing with ac, and cl vanishing with ag.

Vote.— em will be slightly longer than ag, as it is nearer.

III. End at an angle to the picture plane.

1 . Draw the vertical lines ab and cd as before. Great care
is necessary in deciding upon the width between these lines
when the model is in this position. Test the inclination, and
draw ac. Make cd a little less than ab, and join b with d.

2. Bisect ab and cd, and draw ef. This must be carefully
scanned to see that ef vanishes with both lines. Find the
centre, set off the distances, and complete the end.

Note. — These four distances are, of course, only exactly equa>
when the hexagon is quite opposite. Strictly speaking, they
gradually diminish from / to e. In a very large drawing it would
be more accurate to draw the diagonals ad and be. This would
give the first distance slightly larger than the second.

3. Find the inclination of ag, remembering that if ac be
much inclined then ag will be nearly level. Determine the
length of ag, and draw a vertical line gh. Make gh less
than ab. The difference between them may be tested by
measuring. Draw bh.

4. Look at ag and bh and draw//. Make// slightly longer
than ag, and draw Ig and Ih.

5. Notice ag and draw cm. Make cm less than ag, and draw^w.

The Teaching of Drawing

THE TRIANGULAR PRISM

The only point that calls for mention here is the method of
obtaining the height of the prism. Draw the rectangular face
abed in the usual manner. Find the centre, and draw ^/vanish-

ing with both ab and cd. At e draw eg and set off the height.
Join g with a and c. For the farther end draw//£, and make it

a little less than eg.

Draw *h and bh.

PYRAMIDS

I. Axis vertical. — For all pyramids when the axis is vertical
the method is the same, viz. : —
1. Draw the base. 2. Find the
centre. 3. Set up the height
from the centre. 4. Join the
apex with the angles of the base.
Fig. 634 shows a square
pyramid standing upon its base.
Draw the base abed in the usual
manner. Obtain the diagonals.
From e draw the axis ef, and mark
off the height. Join / with a, b
and c.

Fig. 635 shows the same pyramid when one side of the base

Model Drawing. Standard V

is opposite the pupil. Three of the triangular faces are then
visible.

Fig. 636 shows the hexagonal pyramid. Fix point a, the
angle nearest the pupil. Draw ab, the widest side and therefore
the least inclined. Draw acy the next widest side. From c draw
cd vanishing with ab, and from b draw bd, the narrowest side of
the base, to meet cd. Find the centre 0 of cd, and through it
draw ae. Look at ae and draw cf. Through o draw bf, and
from d draw de vanishing with it. Join e with f. Draw the
vertical axis from 0. Set off the height, and join the apex with
the angles of the base.

II. Lying on one of the tri-
angular faces. — Fig. 637 shows
a square pyramid. This is a
very difficult position. The
simplest plan is to mark point a,
and draw the line ab. To get
the slope of ab, hold the pencil
vertical with b and notice the
distance that b is to the right
of a. Determine the inclination,
draw ad, and complete the base.

It will not be of much assistance to draw the axis ; the easier
plan is to determine the inclination and length of ae, and join b
with e.

The Teaching of Draiving

CYLINDRICAL RING

I. Axis vertical.- i. Draw ab. Compare cd with ab and
draw the ellipse.

2. Set off the depth, ae and bf. Draw ef. Make dg a little
longer than ae (because it is nearer), and draw the bottom curve.

3. Set off the width of the ring, ah and bl equal to ae.

The width at dm will be the
same part of ah that cd is
of ab. Notice that en will be
a little less than d7?i. Draw
the inner ellipse.

4. For the inner bottom
curve draw a semi-ellipse on
pq. Notice that no will be
slightly less than hp.

II. Axis horizontal.— If
the ring were level with the
eye then the drawing would
be similar to fig. 638 turned
at right angles ; but if below
the eye the axis will be in-
clined and ab will not be ver-
tical. In the cylinder the
inclination of the axis was first
obtained, but in this case the axis is too short to test its
inclination. It is, therefore, easier to draw the longer dia-

Model Drawing. Standard V 237

meter of the ellipse first. The only difficulty here is in de-
termining the inclination, ab, of this diameter. Hold the pencil
in a line with the longer diameter so as to cut the ellipse into
two symmetrical portions, and with the other hand hold a
pencil vertically with a, as indicated by the dotted line ac.
This will assist the eye to estimate the slope. The rest of the
drawing is done in exactly the same manner as in the previous
figure, and may be easily followed from the construction lines.

Note. — Figs. 627-639 are not included in the Standard V sylla-
bus. They are, however, shown here for the sake of completeness.

VASES

Three sets are recommended by the Department.

1. Set of Three Regular Objects of Form in white pottery.

2. Set of Three Earthenware Vases in terra-cotta.

3. Set of Five Vases in Majolica ware.

The first set is the most suitable for schools, as it gives
greater variety of shape and simpler lines.

The general contour should be noted, and the fact pointed
out that vases with oval or egg-shaped bodies are generally
more effective and beautiful in form than those with either
circular or elliptical ones.

Simple vases in elevation are shown in figs. 214-218, 324,
and 332 ; while figs. 381 and 382 show more difficult ones.
The method of procedure has already been given on page 99,
Standard V, Freehand. Figs. 334, S3^>) and 338 illustrate the
method of drawing the three vases of the first set. Figs. 335
and 337 are from the third set. Fig. 330 shows an enlarged
drawing of the mouth of fig. 334, and fig. 331 shows the foot
of fig. 338. The only additional point needing illustration is
the ornamental handle of fig. $^- Tms *s difficult and should
be shown on the board, and drawn separately in three positions
before drawing it on the vase. If the leaf form to which the
ring is attached be examined, it will be found to be of a pen-
tagonal shape and divided into five parts. The shape varies a

The Teaching of Drawing

little on different vases, but the same method of obtaining it
should be adhered to.

Fig. 640 shows the handle when seen on the side of the
vase.

Fig. 641 shows the front view blocked in. Begin with
line a?>, and ascertain the proportion which ab bears to the
height of the vase. Find the position of c, and draw the base
of the pentagon. Mark the width at d and <?, and complete the
pentagon. Now draw the ring. Divide the pentagon into five
parts as shown.

Fig. 642 shows the completed sketch. Notice that the
points of the leaf are not sharp, but blunt and rounded as
pottery would naturally be.

Figs. 643 and 644 show the most common and also the
most difficult view. In fig. 643 the blocking in is shown. The
central line follows the curve of the vase, and the pentagon is
foreshortened. In fig. 644 notice that the thickness of the leaf
is now visible, and that the right-hand side will not be so clearly
defined as the left or nearer side.

Figs. 645-647 show the largest vase from the second set in
terra-cotta. It is not recommended for Standard V, as,
although of a beautiful shape, it presents too many difficulties

Model Drazving. Standard VI

for the present stage. It is one of the two vases prescribed by
the Department for the examination in what is now known as
the Elementary stage of Model Drawing, corresponding to what
was formerly second grade Model. The other vase is that
shown in figs. 338, 648, and 649.

The elevation of the vase in fig. 645 is shown in order that
the lines to be represented may be clearly seen, as about eight
ellipses have to be indicated in the drawing.

Fig. 646 shows the construction lines. After obtaining the
centre line, draw the lines ab, cd, and ef, representing the
widths of the mouth, the widest part of body, and the foot,
respectively. Now obtain gh, the width of the bottom of the
neck, and lmy the width of the top of the foot. Draw the
mouth and the curve of the body. The general proportions of
these parts should now be carefully examined and the rest of
the figure completed, as in fig. 647. Notice how the lines 1
and 2 gradually die away before reaching the diameter of the
ellipse.

The Teaching of Drawing

Model Drawing. Standard VI

Figs. 648 and 649 show two views of the bottle when lying
down. These are not intended for Standard V. In fig. 648
the axis is nearly parallel to the pupil. First draw the axis ab.
To determine the inclination, hold the pencil in a line with ab,
and with the other hand hold a pencil in a horizontal position
level with a \ the angle between the pencils will give the slope
of the axis. Draw cd, ef, and gh at right angles to ab, and
sketch the outline as in fig. 338.

In fig. 649 the contour is lost in the ellipses to a great extent.
After obtaining the axis, draw the three ellipses on cd, ef, and gh.
The curve of the neck loses itself as shown. The lower part
of the body is smaller than the upper part, and the curve of the
ellipse (shown by the dotted line) will require a little addition at /.

e

The Teaching of Drawing

Syllabus, Standard VI. — Draiving from models of regular
forms and from easy common objects. _

All the models previously shown are suitable for Standard
VI. when grouped. The only fresh point is the arrangement
of the models. Usually two models are set, but this is not an
absolute rule. Very large models should not be used in com-
bination with the vases or any small objects, as the vases will
be so small when drawn as to make it impossible to show their
lines with any degree of accuracy.

Fig. 650 shows the examples given in the ' Illustrated

Syllabus.'

Figs. 627-639 and 645-649 all belong, strictly speaking, to
Standard VJ. course. A few groups will now be given, illus-
trating difficulties that frequently occur.

Fig. 651 shows a group of average difficulty, to be drawn
with the board.

1. Begin by comparing the greatest height ab with the
greatest width b c, so as to obtain an idea of the proportions
of the whole group.

2. Next draw the hexagonal prism after comparing its height
with ab.

3. Hold the pencil vertically in a line with the axis of the
vase, notice where it cuts the prism, and draw de. Hold the
pencil level with the foot of the vase, and notice its position,
whether above or below the corner / of the prism. Compare
the height of the vase with the height of the prism, and com-
plete as previously shown.

4. To draw the board, fix the position of g, its distance
below, and its distance left, of e. Find the inclination of gh.
Notice how far h is to the right of the prism. Find the inclina-

Model Draiving. Standard VI

tion of g/} and determine the position of /. Notice where the
back lines of the board cut the other models. Draw vertical
lines from /, g, and h, and complete the figure.

Notes. — 1. These earlier groups should be composed of a circular
and a right-lined model, and should be placed in easy positions.

2. They will probably take some time to draw correctly, but it
will be found most profitable to endeavour to get the earlier
groups well drawn rather than to attempt a larger number of
1 drawings.

3. The board is generally difficult to draw (see fig. 616). Ob-
serve that fig. 652 is an incorrect drawing, as if ab were level then
the sides should be drawn as in fig. 653. This maybe easily tested

244 The Teaching of Drawing

by the pupil holding the pencil vertically in line with #, as shown
by the dotted line, and noticing on which side 67 the pencil c ap-
pears to be.

Fig. 654. — First draw the cylinder. Now determine the
position of a with regard to b, of c with regard to the edge and
length of the cylinder, and draw ac. Test the inclination before

proceeding further. Obtain the position of d (above and left of
a) and draw ad. Find the inclination of ae, and complete
the figure.

Fig. 655. — This is a very difficult group to draw, and is
shown in two stages. The figures should be blocked in as
shown in the top drawing, obtaining all the main lines and
proper proportions first. Begin with the centre line of the cup,
and draw the ellipse on ab. Now obtain the diameter ef of
the saucer j the position for this diameter will be obtained by
holding the pencil in a horizontal position level with e and f
and noticing where it cuts the sides of the cup. Draw gh for
the points of attachment of the handle, and if a. line be drawn
from the centre through g the direction of the handle will be
indicated.

For the spoon draw the centre line and block in*as shown.

In drawing the book, fix the position of / and draw /;;/.

Model Draiving. Standard VI 245

The Teaching of Drazvin^

Determine the height of «, and complete the end. In drawing
the leaves, notice that the horizontal edges will vanish with the
length of the book.

Objects wholly or partly above the eye should also be
practised — such as a door, window, board and easel, swing
slate, &c.

Fig. 656 shows the construction for the board and easel.
Commence with abed, and set up the height as shown. As the
top of the easel is narrower than the bottom, the side rails will
not come from the points e and/ Hold the pencil level with
f, and notice how much e is below/ Draw a line H for the

level of the eye, and remember that all lines below H run up,
and those above it run down towards H. Lines like the bottom
of the board which are near the level of the eye will be nearly
horizontal. The back legs are not so wide apart as the front
ones, and are parallel to each other. They will therefore not be
drawn to c and d.

Model Draiving. Standard VI

Fig. 657 shows an ordinary swing slate. The dotted lines
show the parts to be drawn first. H marks the level of the
eye.

248 The Teaching of Drawing

I

CHAPTER XI

LIGHT AND SHADE. STANDARD VII

Syllabus. — Drawing any common objects and casts of orna-
ment in light and shade.

This is the most difficult part of the syllabus to carry out
in ordinary schools, as the difficulties in the way of securing a
proper light are very great. The object should be lighted
from one window only (with a northern aspect, if possible), as
cross lights increase the difficulty to a very great extent by de-
stroying the effect of the shadows. The only way to prevent
this is to fence off the other lights by means of screens. A box
with two of its sides knocked out will frequently answer fairly
well for this purpose.

It is also necessary that the teacher should possess a higher
degree of artistic feeling and knowledge than the previous
parts of the syllabus necessitate ; practical acquaintance with
the subject being absolutely necessary before instruction can
be imparted to the pupils. Where these difficulties of teach-
ing, lighting, &c, arise, it is much better to take the alternative
subject of Geometrical Draiving (h.i.), which is easier and quite
as useful to the pupils. (See Chapter VIII. Standard VII.)

Materials. — These are inexpensive and readily procured.
They will depend somewhat upon whether the pencil, crayon,
or stump is used for the shading. Arguments may be adduced
in favour of each, but for producing a good general effect in a
short time the stump is preferable. The pupils will need a
drawing-board, paper with a rough surface, an F or H pencil
for sketching the outline, a piece of indiarubber cut to a sharp
point for removing the dark spots, small paper stumps, and
prepared stumping-chalk.

Light and Shade. Standard VII 249

Paper. — This must have a rough surface, as smooth paper
is perfectly useless. For ordinary practice, French white paper
is very suitable, as it is cheap, and has a ridgy surface. Cart-
ridge paper will do if it has a good texture. For examination
purposes and for finished drawings Whatman's ' Not ' is the
best that can be used.

Stumps. — These are made either of leather or paper. The
small paper stumps sold at about 3d. per dozen are the most
suitable for ordinary purposes. The stump should be held
between the thumb and finger, under the hand, and very gently
turned round while being used, so that all parts of the chalked
end may be brought into use, thus securing an even texture in
the shading.

Stumping-chalk is sold in small bottles by all artists' colour-
men. When using it, a small quantity should be rubbed into
a piece of wash leather pinned at one corner of the board, and
the stump charged by rubbing the point en it. A piece of
rough paper, with the bottom corner turned up so as to prevent
any of the chalk rolling upon the drawing, will answer just as well.

When the shading is obtained by using the pencil or crayon,
then a BB pencil, or a No. 1 Conte Crayon in wood is the
most suitable for the purpose. The Conte Crayon is also use-
ful for indicating the edges of the figure, which are sometimes
apt to get indistinct and irregular.

First Lesson. — The pupil should begin by practising the
laying on of flat even tints of various degrees of darkness.
When this has been satisfactorily accomplished, the shading of
objects should be at once proceeded with. Copying from
shaded drawings is of little use ; the pupil needs practice in
drawing from the object, and the training of the eye to dis-
tinguish the varied gradations of shade between the highest
light of the object and the darkest part of its shadow.

There are many ways of using the stump, all having the
same end in view, namely, the production of an even tint. Some
accomplish this by using broad diagonal strokes, others by a
zigzag stroke ; probably the easiest for covering a large surface
is a rounded zigzag something like the letter S. The method
selected must largely depend upon that which the teacher has

The Teaching of Draivim

found most successful. In all, the steps are the same ; first,
the covering of the surface with strokes, giving a general depth
of tone, and then securing evenness by filling up the light spaces
and removing any dark spots.

i. Rule a two-inch square. Charge the stump by rubbing
it on the chalked leather or paper as previously explained,
taking care that no loose chalk is left on the stump, or the
stroke will be uneven. Try the stump on a piece of white
paper to see that the stroke is of the required degree of dark-
ness ; then, holding it as directed, and gently rolling it while
working, cover the square as in fig. 658 A.

In working begin at the left side, work towards the right,
and try to avoid crossing over a stroke a second time, as this

will produce a darker spot which will need removing. For the
first practice it is desirable to make the strokes rather large
and open, as shown in the bottom part of the square. As the
pupil acquires more power the strokes may be made smaller
and less open, thus securing an even tint at once. The top
part of the square where the strokes are smaller shows a fairly
even shade with one process. Be especially careful to use the
stump lightly and never scrub the paper.

2. Fill up the light spaces by gently touching them with
the point of the stump as shown in stage B.

3. Remove any dark spots by gently pressing (not rubbing)
the point of the indiarubber on them. Clean the indiarubber
after removing each spot by rubbing it on a piece of paper.
The tint should then be even as in C.

Light and Shade.

Standard VII

Draw another square. Charge the stump more heavily with
chalk, and fill up with a darker tint as shown in fig. 659. Finish
in exactly the same manner as shown in
fig. 658, and the result will be a square
of a darker tint than the previous one.

A third square might be filled up in
the same manner with a still darker tint
by charging the stump more fully than in
the last.

Notes. — 1. Great care should be taken
with these first exercises ; speed will come
with practice. To put on an even tint

without much subsequent alteration should be the pupil's aim, as
much use of indiarubber or bread is sure to destroy the texture of
the shading.

2. Remember that the three steps indicated in the lesson must
always be patiently gone through, though practice and care will
gradually decrease the time spent on two and three to a small
amount. When occupied with these two stages the student should
always sit well away from the work, as the general evenness of
the tint can only be seen when the eye is far enough off to take in
the whole of the drawing.

3. A piece of tissue paper should be kept under the hand while
working, and the part of the drawing which is not in progress
should be covered up.

Second Lesson. — When the power of laying on a flat even
tint has been acquired, proceed at once to the shading of a
simple rectangular model such as the cube.

1. Place the model on a sheet of white paper so that the
shadow may be more distinctly seen (it may also sometimes
be desirable to pin a sheet at the back of the model), and draw
the cube very lightly in outline, marking the shadow, and
avoiding rubbing out as far as possible (fig. 660). Do not
make the drawing too large at first: about three inches is quite
long enough for the edge of the cube.

Note. — Use an F or H pencil. Charcoal is frequently used
for this purpose, as the lines can be readily dusted out. It is not,
however, recommended for beginners, as it requires constant
sharpening and is easily broken.

252 The Teaching of Drawing

2. Direct attention to the fact that some) parts of the cube
are lighter than others. The top on which most light falls is
the lightest ; one of the vertical faces is darker than the other,
and the shadow thrown on the paper is the darkest of all. If
the darker vertical face be looked at carefully with half-closed
eyes, it will be noticed that this face is not of the same depth
of tone, but that the top part is darker than the bottom part.
This is due to the light reflected from the white paper upon
which the model stands. Remove the white paper, and place
the cube upon a black surface, when this difference will not be
seen. To illustrate this further, hold a sheet of white paper
opposite to the darkest side of the model ; the light reflected
from the paper will cause this side to appear much lighter.

The facts observed may now be summarised as follows :

(a) The lightest part of the cube is said to be in high light.

(b) The part of the cube upon which the light does not directly
fall is in shade.

(c) The part of the paper which is deprived of light by the cube
is the cast-shadow.

(d) The parts of the cube made lighter by the paper upon which
it stands are in reflected light.

(e) Place a cylinder on the paper, and in addition to the four
preceding points, it will be seen that between the highest light and
the shade, there are intermediate tints on the curved surface upon
which the light does not fall so directly. This is termed the half-
tone.

3. Begin to shade the darkest part, that is the cast-shadow.
Put on an even tint of the same depth as its lightest part

4. Shade the darker vertical face with an even tint, as dark
as its lightest part.

5. Shade the lighter side in the same manner. The drawing
should now show three degrees of shade, all perfectly even as
in fig. 661.

6. Put in the gradations on the vertical faces (fig. 662).
The left-hand face is darker towards the top and /eft, the paper
making the bottom part lighter. The right-hand face is
darkest at the top and at the left, nearest the light part of the

Light and Shade. Standard VII

254 The Teaching of Drazving

top and the left-hand face. The pupil will notice that the
bottom part of the right-hand face is not the lightest part, as
the cast shadow prevents so much light being reflected upon
it.

7. Darken the cast shadow towards the object.

8. The top of the cube, although the lightest part, is not
quite white, and requires a very light tint from an almost clean
stump on the part furthest removed. This general principle
should be carefully borne in mind : That a light tone if placed
beside a dark one appears lighter where it approaches the darker
tone, and the dark tone appears darker where it approaches the
lighter one. This will be seen to be the case on the cube ; the
top appears lighter as it approaches the darker vertical faces,
the vertical faces appear darker as they approach the lighter
top, and the right-hand face appears darker towards the edge
nearest the lighter-toned face, &c.

Notes. — 1. Be very careful not to make the gradations too dark.

2. As the pupil progresses he will be able to lay on a gradated
tint at once, instead of doing it in two stages.

3. The above steps apply to all models, and the rectangular and
hexagonal prisms will present no difficulty to those who have
mastered the shading of the cube.

The Cylinder.— This is taken as the type for all circular
models, as the same rules are applicable more or less to all
similarly shaped objects.

1. Sketch the cylinder, mark in the cast shadow, and
indicate by a light line the part of the cylinder in shade. This
line will commence at a, where the shadow is seen to begin

2. Shade the cast shadow evenly of a depth equal to its
lightest part.

3. Lay on an even tint, from the right-hand side to the line
marking the extent of the shade, as dark as its lightest part

4. Notice that the darkest part is not at the edge, and
gradate the tint already laid on. The highest light is not quite
at the left edge. On each side of the. high light put in the half

Light and Shade. Standard VII

tone on the portions of the cylinder upon which the light falls
obliquely. Be careful to gradate these tones so that there is a
gradual darkening from the highest light to the darkest shade.
5. Darken the cast shadow where necessary, and put a very
light tint upon the top, decreasing as it approaches the front

The cylinder lying down should be treated similarly ; its

256 The Teaching of Drazving

vertical end will get lighter as it approaches the dark part of
the shade on its length, as in the left-hand face of the cube.

The cone is treated similarly to the cylinder ; the only fresh
point to notice is that the darkest part of the shade is near the
apex, as owing to its sloping surface there is less light reflected
on this part. The same fact applies to all pyramids when
standing on their bases.

The waterbottle from the three objects of form is shown as
an example for vases, as it is the one prescribed for the
elementary stage of model drawing, and is in common use.

1 . Very carefully sketch in the outline ; mark the cast
shadow and the line of shade (fig. 666).

2. Lay on the shade with an even tint as dark as its lightest
part.

3. Put in the cast shadow in a similar manner (fig. 667).

4. Gradate the shade on the neck as in the cylinder, bearing
in mind that the darkest part is not quite at the edge. The
darkest part will be at a, as here the shadow from the neck falls
upon the shoulder of the vase. The darkest shade on the body
is some distance from the edge, owing to the reflected light
from the ground. Add the half tones. The lightest part of
the body will be at by as the light falls most directly upon the
vase at this part.

5. Complete the cast shadow. Notice that it falls on the
foot with a rather sharp edge ; on the ground its edges should
be kept soft. The middle part of this shadow is lighter than
the outside, owing to the light reflected from the body of the
vase.

6. Blend the tones carefully, and complete as in fig. 668.
When the pupils have shaded several of the models singly,

they may at once proceed to the shading of a group. The
1 Illustrated Syllabus ' shows, as an example, a group of three
objects lightly shaded. The pupils should notice the cast-
shadow thrown upon the book by the other two objects. Any
group of models of about the same degree of difficulty as is
usually set for Standard VI will make a suitable group for
shading.

Shading from Casts. — The syllabus specifies shading from

Light and Shade. Standard VII

The Teaching of Drawing

common objects and casts of ornament. In most schools the
group of models would probably be taken. Casts of ornament
in plaster of Paris may be obtained at a very cheap rate from
D. Brucciani & Co., 40 Russell St., Covent Garden, W.C., the
agents to the Department. Ten casts of elementary ornament
suitable for Standard VII, or for the elementary stage of light
and shade, may be obtained for 1/.

Light and Shade.

Standard VII

Method of Shading the Cast. — Three drawings showing an
ordinary cast in three stages of development are given.

Fig. 669. — 1. Place the cast in an upright position against
the wall, and about level with the pupil's eye. Begin by
drawing the slab upon which the ornament is placed, as this
will help the pupil to draw the outline more easily.

The Teaching of Drawing

2. Draw the middle line and fix the position of the top
and bottom of the ornament (a and b).

3. Find the position of c and draw the line de. In the same
manner obtain^.

4. Draw the curves from these points.

5. Draw the other big curves after obtaining their position
as shown by the construction lines.

Light and Shade. Standard VII 261

■a

6. Complete the drawing and very lightly indicate the cast
shadows.

Notes. — 1. It is not at all necessary that the student should
draw all the horizontal lines shown on the figure, as the rubbing
out of these lines will spoil the surface of the paper. It will be
sufficient in most cases to carry the pencil across and mark the
point.

2. Sketch the cast very lightly, as alterations may then be
easily made.

Fig. 670. — t. Very lightly shade the background with an
almost clean stump. When there is a large surface to cover,
the forefinger, covered with a piece of wash leather very faintly
charged with chalk and well rubbed on trial paper, may be
used with advantage for this purpose. The portions close to
the drawing can be filled up afterwards with the stump. By
putting in the background first the student is better able to
judge the degree of shade necessary for the various parts of the
cast. The light parts will be lighter than the background and
will stand out better from it.

2. Put on the main shades and the cast shadows. Where
a shade on a curved portion approaches the lighter part, be
careful to let it die away gradually.

Fig. 671. — 1. Gradate the parts in shade by darkening
them towards the left, where they approach the high light.
Continue the shade over the lighter parts where needed, leaving
the highest light white.

2. Darken the shadow where it approaches the cast. Be
careful to keep the edges of the shadow soft, letting them die
away somewhat gradually into the surface of the slab.

262 The Teaching of Drawing

CHAPTER XII

THE ELEMENTARY DRAWING CERTIFICATE

As all teachers of boys' schools are required to teach drawing
it is very necessary that they should qualify themselves by
obtaining the certificate. This certificate covers the work
required from the standards, and the Education Code, 1893,
art. 60, states that ' No teachers, passing the second year *s exam-
ination after December, 1896, will be recognised as certificated
teachers unless, or until, they have obtained the First or Second
Class Elementary Drawing Certificate? This applies to all
teachers, both male and female.

Those teachers who may be partially qualified and wish to
obtain their certificate should procure information from the
Science and Art Department as to what subjects they must
take to complete it.

The requirements at present for the First Class Certificate
are a First Class in : — (a) the Elementary Stage of Freehand
Drawing {subject 2b) ; (b) the Elementary Stage of Model
Drawing (subject $a) ; (c) the Elementary Stage of Shading from
Casts {subject $b) ; and (d) a pass in the Elementary Stage of
Practical Plane and Solid Geometry.

For the Second Class Certificate :—(<*) a pass in the Ele-
mentary Stage of Practical Plane and Solid Geometry ; (b) a
second class in the Elementary Stage of Model Drawing ; (c)
a second class in the Elementary Stage of Freehand Drawing.

'Pupil teachers may, after August 31, 1893, be examined
at their schools in the Elementary Stage of Freehand, of
Model, of Shading from Casts, and of Perspective. Teachers
wishing to be examined in Geometrical Drawing must sit for
examination in that subject at the May examinations of Science

The Elementary Draiving Certificate 263

and Art schools and classes, and the examination in Geometrical
Drawing at elementary schools will cease.'

A few hints and directions are given with regard to each
subject. If the method of working explained in the previous
chapters be thoroughly understood and well practised, the
teacher should not experience any great difficulty in doing the
work required.

Elementary Stage Freehand. — The instructions for ex-
amination are : — That the leading lines of the whole figure
must be sketched in, and that the drawing should fairly fill the
paper supplied (J imperial sheet, i5^in. by n^in.). When
this is done, carry the drawing to completion, as far as possible
in clear outline.

The object is clearly to ascertain whether the proper
method of drawing a copy is understood. Figs. 377, 378, 379,
380, show the leading lines of the figures they accompany and
are suitable for preliminary practice. Two recent examination
tests are also given, from which the student may see the
character of the copies set and the proper method of drawing
them.

Figs. 672 and 674 show the copies as set, slightly reduced
in size.

Fig. 673 shows the construction and leading lines of fig.
672. The left side is carried a little further towards completion
than the right.

Fig. 675 shows the construction and leading lines of fig.
674. The student will have no difficulty in following after
studying the figure. In both copies begin with the spiral
curves and the circles containing the flower, leaving the detail
until last. The copies would require enlarging to abDut 2\
times the given size.

Elementary Stage Model. — Practise the methods of draw-
ing the models and vases given in Chapter X., and especially
notice the remarks concerning the arrangement of the group in

It is usual to give three models in the group for examina-
tion, which are frequently required to be drawn with the board
upon which they may be placed.

The Teaching of Drawing

The Elementary Drawing Certificate 265

The Teaching of Drawing

The examination is now confined to groups composed from
the following models and vases prescribed by the Science and
Art Department, and which are all dealt with in Chapter X.
The cube, square prism, square pyramid, triangular prism, hexa-
gonal prism, cylinder, cylindrical ring, and cone, together with
the bottle from the three objects of form (figs. 338, 648, and 649)
and the large terra cotta vase (figs. 645-64 7 ).

Practise groups of these models, paying special attention to
the method of drawing ; as, if the group be correctly drawn, even
though not finished, the student would undoubtedly get
through. To secure a first-class the group should be correctly
drawn and completed in the hour allowed.

Elementary Stage of Shading from Casts. — The student
is required to make a drawing in chalk, from a cast in lour
relief, in three hours. The cast shown in figs. 669-671 is
suitable for the purpose and is one in common use. The

The Elementary Drawing Certificate

Illustrated Syllabus also shows two casts such as are set for
this stage.

Read over the directions given in Chapter XL, and then
draw a variety of casts, as success largely depends upon the
amount of practice bestowed upon the subject. At the same
time the student will find that more useful knowledge of shading
will be obtained by well finishing two or three casts, than by
making rough drawings of a large number.

Elementary Stage of Practical Plane and Solid Geo-
metry.— The course indicated for Standards VI. and VII. forms
a good introduction. The student who thoroughly understands
the principles there dealt with will be able to take up the Ele-
mentary Stage without much difficulty. ' Practical Plane and
Solid Geometry,' by I. H. Morris (Longmans & Co., two shillings
and sixpence), amply covers the requirements.

PRINTED BY

SPOTTISWOODE AND CO., NEW-STR1-ET SQUARE

LONDON

on the date to which renewed.
